# Chapter 13: Children and Love Languages

If your child is often making presents for you, wrapping them up and giving them to you with a special glee in his or her eye, your child’s primary love language is probably “Receiving Gifts.” He gives to you because he desires to receive. If you observe your son or daughter always trying to help a younger brother or sister, it probably means that his or her primary love language is “Acts of Service.” If he or she is often telling you how good you look and what a good mother or father you are and what a good job you did, it is an indicator that his or her primary love language is “Words of Affirmation.”

All of that is on the subconscious level for the child. That is, the child is not consciously thinking, “If I give a gift, my parents will give me a gift; if I touch, I will be touched,” but her behavior is motivated by her own emotional desires. Perhaps she has learned by experience that when she does or says certain things, she typically receives certain responses from her parents. Thus, she does or says that which results in getting her own emotional needs met. If all goes well and their emotional needs are met, children develop into responsible adults; but if the emotional need is not met, they may violate acceptable standards, expressing anger toward parents who did not meet their needs, and seeking love in inappropriate places.

> Why is it that as the child gets older, our “Words of Affirmation”turn to words of condemnation

Have you seen that in your community? A teenager runs away from home. The parents wring their hands, saying, “How could he do this to us after all we have done for him?” but the teenager is sixty miles down the road in some counselor’s office, saying, “My parents don’t love me. They have never loved me. They love my brother, but they don’t love me.” Do the parents, in fact, love that teenager? In the majority of cases, they do. Then what’s the problem? Very likely, the parents never learned how to communicate love in a language the child could understand.

Perhaps they bought ball gloves and bicycles to show their love, but the child was crying, “Will someone play ball with me? Will someone go riding with me?” The difference between buying a ball glove and playing ball with a child may be the difference between an empty love tank and a full one. Parents can sincerely love their children (most do), but sincerity is not enough. We must learn to speak the primary love language of our children if we are to meet their emotional need for love.

## Words of Affirmation

Parents typically give many affirming words when the child is young. Even before the child understands verbal communication, parents are saying, “What a pretty nose, what beautiful eyes, what curly hair,” and so on.

## Quality Time

Quality time means giving a child undivided attention. For the small child, it means sitting on the floor and rolling a ball back and forth with him.

## Receiving Gifts

Many parents and grandparents speak the language of gifts excessively. In fact, when one visits toy stores, one wonders if parents believe that is the only language of love.

## Acts of Service

When children are small, parents are continually doing “Acts of Service” for them. If they did not, the child would die. Bathing, feeding, and dressing all require a great deal of work in the first few years of a child’s life.

## Physical Touch

We have long known that “Physical Touch” is an emotional communicator to children. Research has shown that babies who are handled often develop better emotionally than babies who are not. Naturally many parents and other adults pick up an infant, hold it, cuddle it, kiss it, squeeze it, and speak silly words to it.
