# The Only Way to Interrupt People and Still Have Them Love You

To paraphrase, put most simply, is to put another person’s meaning into your words and deliver it back to him. If you’re taking abuse, you want to somehow intrude so you can make the diatribe a conversation. Then you can cast what you think lies behind his aggressive words (his real point) in your own words (which will be calmer because you’re not emotionally charged one here), and be sure that you have heard it correctly.

When you paraphrase like that, you have actually inserted yet a third person into a two-person dialogue. Suddenly you have not his words with his meaning or your words with your meaning, but your words with his meaning.

#### The Sword of Insertion

This weapon is that single sentence that allows you to cut into a tirade and take control. It’s hard to stop people talking. They are upset and they can’t be told “Get to the point!” All that will get you is “I amgetting to the point! You’re not listening.” And don’t tell people to shut up or to calm down or to let you talk, because they won’t shut up, they won’t calm down, and they won’t let you talk.

So you start with the Sword of Insertion, a wedge into the harangue like “Whoa!” or “Listen!” (spoken earnestly, not in anger) or “Wait a second.”

#### The Ultimate Empathetic Sentence

Here then is the powerful sentence that will allow you to interrupt anyone without fear of bodily harm: “Let me be sure I heard what you just said.”

This simple sentence is so empathetic, so full of conciliation and cooperation, so pregnant with sincerity, that you’ll hardly ever see someone let it slide by. What you’re saying, in essence, is “Let me be sure I understand you. Let me be sure we’re on the same wavelength. Let me be sure I heard that.”

Everything about that sentence says you’re trying to understand. No matter how upset, just about anyone will shut up and listen because she too wants to be sure you heard what she said. In fact, the surer she is that you were notlistening, the more likely she is to now hear you out, if only to prove you wrong!

#### Fourteen Benefits of Paraphrasing

One. Magically, in one sentence, by paraphrasing you’ve hooked the other person. He’s listening. Using the Sword of Insertion with that sentence is the only way I know to interrupt somebody without generating further resistance.

Two. You have taken control because you’re talking and he is listening.

Three. You’re making sure of what you heard right on the spot, not finding out later you misunderstood.

Four. If you have notheard the person accurately, he can correct you. That fills your pockets with ammunition. The more you know about somebody, the better, and the more he speaks, the more he reveals about his emotions, his prejudices, and his assumptions. That can only help you in deflecting insults, keeping his attention, and generating voluntary compliance.

Five. You have made the other person a better listener, because no one listens harder than he does to his own point of view. You’re telling him, “Here’s what I hear you saying,” and you can bet he wants to hear that.

Six. You’ve created empathy. The other person will believe you’re trying to understand. Whether you really are interested is irrelevant. 

Seven. Once you have thrust the Sword of Insertion and pronounced the ultimate empathetic sentence, you have gained attention. Then, to effect this seventh benefit of paraphrasing you want to immediately follow up with something like this: “Okay, you are feeling X because of Y, true?” The X equals an emotion, like anger or frustration, and the Y equals a reason. You don’t even have to be right. You’re guessing at this point. For instance, it might go like this: “Whoa! Listen, let me be sure I understand what you’re saying. You’re feeling angry because you believe I purposely undermined you in front of your colleagues yesterday at the meeting.”

Now the person can correct either the emotion you used for X or the reason you used for Y. He might say, “Well, no, I’m not angry. I’m disappointed.” Now you’re getting somewhere. Whether he’s angry or disappointed will make a difference in where you go from there. Or he might modify X, the reason. “Yeah, I’m angry, but I’m not saying you purposely did it.”

Notice that my being right is not the issue. Making the attempt to get it right is the issue, because I’m appearing concerned and it allows the upset person to modify his original statements. He’s becoming more reasonable, without your having to vainly shout “Be reasonable!” (which never works).

Eight. Paraphrasing overcomes a strange phenomenon I call “sonic intention.” People often think they have said something because they heard themselves say it in their mind, or because they had so carefully rehearsed it.

My advice in a situation like that is to give in, because I’ve tried arguing and I always wound up sleeping in the pickup truck

Nine. This advantage to using paraphrasing is that it has a clarifying effect for people standing around. Paraphrasing should make me sound as if I’m trying to work on the problem, rather than react to the problem.

Ten. The tenth advantage of paraphrasing is that it prevents metaphrasing—which I define as putting words (especially inaccurate ones) into other people’s mouths. Metaphrasing is a perversion of paraphrasing.

Too often we’re so concerned about what people oughtto be saying that we paraphrase them as wewould have said it. That always insults and angers people.

Metaphrasing is useful under only one condition. If you’re working as a dispatcher, working the emergency phones, often you have to take control of a verbal encounter and extract information quickly. You’ll want to use Step 1 of paraphrasing, the Sword of Insertion, “Whoa! Whoa! Let me be sure I heard what you just said.” But then, instead of paraphrasing, move right to metaphrasing. In short, the person never again gets into the encounter except to answer pertinent questions. You’re guiding the conversation quickly: “There’s somebody in the back of your house? Can you see him? Does he have a weapon? Is he moving? Clarify your address for me again. We have officers on the way. What is the man doing? Can he see you?”

The person who might otherwise panic and become hysterical and of no help is giving you information. Though your approach may sound aggressive, it shows tremendous concern. It gives the comforting impression that you are helping, that you are in control. Frightened people usually calm down when they think their crisis is finally being handled by somebody who cares.

Eleven. You can ask for reverse paraphrasing to be sure the other person understands you. If you want to be a better supervisor, or ensure that your children understand you, ask that they paraphrase back to you what they take to be your meaning.

I’ve found that up to seven of ten people will misread a document and miss the point. More horrifying, eight of ten misunderstand most verbal exchanges. It’s easy to talk, but it’s hard to listen well. And when you ask someone, “Do you understand what I’ve just said?” very few people will admit they missed your point. The key is not to ask for a negative answer. Ask the person to tell you what you said, and you’ll get an accurate reading how you’ve communicated. Remember, the responsibility for the understanding belongs to the speaker, not the listener. Your job is to get through.

Ask him to repeat it back to you for yourbenefit: “To be sure I said what I intended to say, would you give back what you understand the point of this discussion has been?” People will do that, and it safeguards you.

Twelve. You also safeguard yourself by paraphrasing back what your boss or your spouse or children say. It’s possible your supervisor may not say exactly what he or she meant. If you don’t get it right, are you going to win the argument later? You walk in with a report your boss asked for two weeks before and he hits you with “I told you I needed you in here at ten o’clock so I could have that for my meeting at eleven. This report’s worthless now.”

You know full well he never said ten o’clock, and you thought you were several hours early with it. Are you going to say, “You never said it had to be to you by ten”?

In the interest of truth, you might try that. But then he or she says, “I most certainly did, and that was the most important part of the assignment. What’s the matter with you?” Argue that one, right or wrong, and you’re liable to be arguing for the last time. Your only recourse at that point is to say, “I’m sorry. I must not have heard it.” If you had paraphrased before you left the office the first time, your boss would have heard either that you missed the time deadline or that he or she forgot to mention it. It would be clarified, and your hard work would eventually pay off.

Thirteen. Paraphrasing has an unusual psychological advantage I call “generating the fair-play response.” Whoever you’re paraphrasing is almost psychologically forced to play by the same rules and paraphrase you. It’s kind of the Golden Rule again, applied to communication: Treat others as you would want to be treated under identical circumstances. So if you use paraphrasing, if you work people skillfully, they’re apt—even despite their intentions—to give you equal time.

Fourteen. Finally, when you paraphrase, it etches the facts in your mind. If you have to write a report or you’re phoning information back to your boss about the facts of a meeting, the paraphrasing reinforces your own memory. Your report, written or oral, will be more concise and more accurate.
