# Translation

ONCE YOU HAVEmastered the art of representation, translation becomes crucial. Translation is the ability to put what you say in the most proper, fitting, assertive, and powerful words possible. The goal is to put the precise meaning in your mind into your listener’s mind. That means doing whatever is necessary to avoid the misunderstanding that comes with normal distractions and influences.
In many ways, this is a simple process, communication boiled down to its four basic elements:

1. **Content**. You have to know what you’re talking about. As a professional or a parent, you must decide precisely what it is you want and need to communicate.

2. **Coding**. Coding is merely putting your message into words. This involves thinking of those words as a code that reflects your meaning. Think, for example, how many ways there are to tell a man you cannot help him. Or to tell a man to step out of his car. Words should be seen as a way of reflecting meaning, but not ego—you must separate your words (meaning) from your self (ego).

3. **Sending**. Once you know your meaning and have chosen the words for it, it’s time to transmit it, whether by phone or in person, using your voice and other nonverbals (facial expressions, body language, etc.).

4. **Decoding**. Decoding is the responsibility of the hearer, but how well he decodes is in direct proportion to the effectiveness of the content, coding, and sending—yours. His decoding is also affected by your demeanor and carriage (voice and body language), external noise (cars, planes, phones, people, etc.), and his own internal noise (what I call “brain damage,” or any other influence he may be under).

Most of us suffer from some level of brain damage. We don’t like to be told what to do, perhaps. Or we’re tired or think we’ve done enough for one day and we’re ready to misunderstand what others are about to say.

#### Of Rabbits and Green Cheese

Natural language is disastrous. That’s what makes translation indispensable. I once heard a very interesting story that I believe proves my point:

Neil Armstrong, the U.S. astronaut who in 1969 was the first man to walk on the moon, went on a world tour in 1972. In Japan he was asked by a tiny grade school child what it was really like on the moon. When Armstrong heard the translation he must have thought it a pretty simple question. He could have written a book on the subject. Rather than get into a long, complex answer for his young, Japanese-speaking audience, he responded with a quick bit of humor. He said, “Well, I didn’t find a man in the moon or any green cheese, that’s for sure!”

The Japanese translator told the children that Mr. Armstrong had said, “Well, I didn’t find any rabbits on the moon, that’s for sure!”

Now was that a good translation or a bad one? Believe it or not, it was excellent. Japanese culture contains no stories about a man in the moon or the moon being made of green cheese. In a full moon, they see a huge, pregnant rabbit, rather than a man. I’ve always seen her. Many northeast Indians see the same thing, as do many other Asians. On the lower right side (at about 5 o’clock) of the moon they see a gray blotch they regard as a hutch of baby rabbits. They tell hundreds of stories to their children about the moon’s Mama Rabbit and her babies.

You’ll notice that though the words were different, the meaning was the same. Armstrong was saying, in effect, that when he got to the moon, it wasn’t at all what it appears from Earth. In our culture that would mean no man and no green cheese. In Japanese culture it means no Mama Rabbit or baby rabbits.

> My rule is: Treat everyone the same (with REspect and dignity), but don’t talk to everyone the same way. You don’t talk to each of your children the same way, do you? Since each responds differently, based on his or her makeup and character, you instinctively learn to communicate uniquely to each one.

The great salesperson listens to people and interacts with them awhile, then suddenly begins to use the right kinds of words, whether they be emotional or pictorial, to paint an effective picture. To effectively represent anyone or anything, you must get out of yourself and get into others.

#### An Unnatural Act

Listening is not a natural act. It is highly artificial and artistic. In fact, listening is notthe opposite of talking, and if you think it is, you’re as brain-damaged as I used to be. In our culture, the opposite of talking is more like waiting to interrupt.

Active listening is a highly complex skill that has four different steps: Being open and unbiased, hearing literally, interpreting the data, and acting.

High school teachers tell me, “I have a bad class. What can I do about that?”

I say, “There is no such thing as a bad class. Only bad teaching.” Sorry, but the responsibility of getting through lies with the teacher. I almost always start out with difficult classes, because the attendees are usually mandated to be there. They don’t think they want to be taught. They’re already professionals. They’re on the street, dealing in dangerous situations all day, and they’re pretty sure that some Ph.D. won’t be able to tell them anything new—especially about talking their way out of situations rather than taking charge physically. I have to perform in such a way as to get and hold their attention.

Take the responsibility to be a good communicator. Get people to listen by the power and manner with which you send your message.

When you’re on the listening end, you may be open and unbiased and able to literally hear, but how do you interpret what you’ve heard so you can decide on a course of action?

Start with one of my undeniable, inarguable, street-survival truths: People hardly ever say what they mean. If you react to what they say, you make a mistake. People under the influence of liquor, drugs, rage, fear, anxiety, ignorance, stupidity, or bias, don’t mean anything they say.

If you begin to grasp this point, you can become a more effective communicator. Here are two examples.

#### Deputy on the Doorstep

I was going to teach Verbal Judo to a sheriff’s department, so the night before the classes I went on a ride-along with a young deputy. He answered a burglary call and knocked on the door. Before the deputy could ask the nature of the problem, he was hit with “Where the heck have you people been? I called three and a half hours ago and you’re just
The deputy, of course, had had a tough day too, so he snapped off the words that came most naturally to his lips. “Hey, listen to me, sir, I don’t have to listen to this. I’m not paid enough to take your verbal abuse. I’m here, so if you want some help, I’ll give you some help. You want to stand there and rant and rave at me, I’m going to go back into service and let you handle your own problem.” He turned to walk off the porch, and of course the guy hit the roof.

From what you’ve learned already, what should the deputy have said? All the words thrown at him were born of rage and frustration. The citizen, a victim, didn’t mean a word of that diatribe. What he really meant were four different things:

1. “I need some help.”

2. “Can I get any of my stuff back?”

3. “How can I keep this from happening again? It’s a jungle out there.”

4. “What do I do with the feeling of having just been raped?”

If you have ever been burglarized, you know how the victim felt. It is no minor event.

Now, why didn’t the citizen say those four things? Why did he resort to every cliché he’d ever heard about what cops are doing when they’re not on the scene? Because he was upset. He was frustrated. He was going to take it out on somebody.

Now, how would the Michael Jordan of communication have responded? Someone who understood that the man had not meant what he said and knew where the real meaning lay would have used a Sword of Insertion and gone on from there. Something like “Sir, listen to me. Whoa, I ’preciate that! You’re right, it’s a jungle out there or I would’ve been here sooner. But I’m here now, sir, and here’s what I need to do. I need to see where those people got in the house and where they got out. And you need to conduct me on that tour and assist me in that investigation.

“While you’re doing that, sir, I want you to be thinking very carefully about what is missing. Do you have pictures, serial numbers, markings on the stuff stolen? Because when we’re done, I’m going to sit down with you and do a police report. This doesn’t have to be meaningless paperwork. With a good report and lots of specifics, our department is often able to return thirty-five to forty percent of stolen property over time, some of it in reusable condition. I’d like to think maybe that could happen for you.

“Before I leave, let me tell you another thing, sir. You rightly pointed out how busy I am, but I’m never too busy that I can’t take a minute or two to walk you around your house before leaving and point out some ways that you can safeguard it. I’m an expert in that area. May I come in?”

> If you gave your children everything they wanted, you’d turn them into mean, nasty little yuppies. You’d be working two and three jobs, and you’d grow old quick and die. Never react to what people say. React to what they mean. Just remember: People hardly ever say what they mean.
