# Mediation

They took a toddler, barely verbal, to a safe spot near a busy intersection and told him to watch the cars. He was fascinated by the motion of the traffic, and for as long as it held his attention, they let him watch.

Then he was asked, “What did you see?”

The little boy said, naïvely but accurately, “Sometimes cars go this way and sometimes they go that way. They stop here; they go there.”

The little boy was told, “That’s good. Now look up there.” Without hearing any more explanation, the boy noticed the traffic light and soon began to see it change colors. Within twenty minutes he was able to recognize order out of what had appeared disorder and make sense of what had appeared nonsense. He said, “Red, stop. Green, go. Yellow, I don’t know.”

The point of that story for my purposes is that the person who pointed out the traffic light was a mediator. The great service of the mediator, whether it’s a psychologist helping you and your spouse live in harmony or a police officer working with somebody who refuses to get out of a car, is to help people see something new.

Mediators do this by fulfilling one of the definitions of the Latin word medius, “one who goes between.” Effective mediators go between or across your experience, enabling you to see something in a new way. In short, they educate, making sense out of things by putting them into perspective.

#### The Mountain Man in the Alley

Simply put, the art of mediation is the ability to skillfully present options, which takes us right back to Step 3 of the Five-Step Hard Style.

#### Three in One

The people you deal with may have other kinds of things to lose (like reputation, standing in the community or business, freedom of movement, financial options, family relationships). It’s your job as professional communicator—or even an amateur Verbal Judo practitioner—to anticipate these and empathize. When you put things into context for the person, you’re translating.

When I helped the mountain man see which of his options were in his best interest, I was cutting across his experience as a service to him. That was mediation, getting him to see his experience in a way that would alter his behavior.
