# The Nice, the Difficult, and the Wimp



Why is the word that created everything from lunar landings to drive-through hamburger joints. It is the word that irritates parents more than any other, but it also is a sign that children are growing up and maturing.

“Why?” is the most American question there is. The second and third most American questions—and sure to infuriate—are “Who do you think you are to tell me what to do?” and “Where do you get your authority?”

The fourth all-American inquiry, which, if you can answer it, will help you deal with the first three, is “What’s in it for me?”

When Difficult People challenge your authority, it is usually pointless to explain why you’ve asked them to do something. They may not even care that you are authorized to make your request. They may not even care about the consequences of failing to obey. But they are always interested in how the deal might benefit them. When I want voluntary compliance from a Difficult Person, I explain early on what’s in it for him. As clearly and specifially as I can, I show him what he has to gain. Only when that doesn’t work will I tell him what he stands to lose.

There’s a big payoff in all this: When you shift from resisting to appreciating and even welcoming Difficult People, things become interesting and less tense.

The toughest bird of all is the Wimp. Wimps are the ones who sound like Nice People but are closet Difficult People. To your face they say, “Oh yes,” “I agree,” “You’re right.” They may even compliment you on your words, ideas, or even clothes. They’ve got the courtesy rap down cold. But later they get you back, in the back, baby.

These backstabbers are customers or colleagues who act friendly and pretend all is well with your relationship. Then they bitch about you to your boss, to their friends, and to anyone else who’ll listen (and who doesn’t love to listen to bad mouthing?).

Wimps do not like authority. They hate being told what to do. On the other hand, they don’t have the guts to challenge you. Wimps want revenge. They feel the need to even the score.

I frequently face Wimps in my classes, yes even among cops. I have found the best way to deal with them is to strip them of their camouflage. Not honest enough to be straightforward Difficult People—who are much easier to deal with—Wimps usually want to hide behind other people.

When I’m teaching Verbal Judo and I hear people mutter, “That’s a bunch of garbage,” I don’t let it pass.

I say, “Excuse me, what was that you said? I’d like to know.” When they try to wave me off or laugh it away, I persist. “No, tell me so I can speak to it.”

The Wimp has been stripped of his cover and now he has to put up or shut up. Now he can either make a legitimate point, ask a question, or shut up. And if he shuts up he has lost credibility with his peers. If nothing else, that eliminates the sniping.

any think it’s best to ignore Wimps, but that’s just another form of resisting them. Ignored or resisted, they grow stronger. The basic principle here is to confront them honestly. They immediately weaken.

Resist the urge to gossip about these people or snipe back at them. Those are Wimp techniques, and they are often better at them than you are, unless you too are a Wimp.

Exposure is totally unsettling to Wimps. Once you’ve blown their chicken-hearted covers, by and large they will leave you alone. They’ll either realize that their tactics don’t work with you and give up, or they’ll find someone else to bother.

Learning to identify and distinguish the Nice, the Difficult, and the Wimp is a basic first step in your journey of mastering Verbal Judo.
