# The Most Powerful Word in the English Language

To have empathy for someone does not mean to sympathize with him. It does not mean to love or even to like somebody. You don’t have to approve of him. And you are certainly not required to agree with what he says or accept his invitation to Thanksgiving dinner.

Empathyhas Latin and Greek roots. Em, from the Latin, means “to see through,” and pathy,from the Greek, means “the eye of the other.” So to empathize means to understand, to see through the eyes of another. The moment you stop thinking like your employer, you’d better start looking for another job. The moment you stop thinking like your friends, you’d better find yourself a new crowd to run with.

Empathy is the quality of standing in another’s shoes and understanding where he’s coming from.

---

Windy night two years into my police career. I answered a call about a guy threatening to commit suicide. I had been on another call, and when I arrived I found a bunch of policemen standing around a man lying nude in a bathtub full of water. His toe was hooked to an electric heater, which he was threatening to jerk into the tub. It would, of course, have electrocuted him before our eyes.

“You pigs don’t understand!” he screamed. “I want to kill myself!”

The officers pleaded with him, “C’mon, friend, you don’t want to do that. You’ve got your whole life ahead of you. Things will look better tomorrow.”

The only problem with that is that the guy knew better. He was the one with the problems: money, love, job, whatever. And Murphy’s Law tells us things aren’t going to be better tomorrow. A guy talking suicide thinks Murphy was an optimist anyway.

One of the officers turned to me and said, “This is your beat. You handle it.”

I pulled another cop close and whispered, “Find the fuse box and cut off the power.”

Meanwhile, I turned to the guy in the tub. Despite what he had said, I believed he was looking for a way out of his predicament. If he really wanted to die, he’d have killed himself. He wanted to be listened to, and now he needed to save face. Instead of trying to talk him out of frying himself in the tub, I decided to move withhim. That meant I had to try to think like him. I quickly contemplated what it must be like to face imminent bathtub electrocution. It struck me as an especially horrible way to go.

I said, “You know, it’s really too bad that of the hundred and five ways you can kill yourself, friend, you’ve picked the hundred and fifth most painful. You think it’s going to be quick, right? You think all you have to do is pull the heater in the tub and you’re gone. Let me tell you something. Research shows that death by electrocution in water can take anywhere from eight to twelve minutes—minutes of excruciating pain.

“You’re going to smell your hair burning. You’re going to see the water bubbling and boiling, your skin peeling back from your knuckles, your sternum split. If you think life’s been tough up to now, friend, you’ve got eight to twelve minutes to consider real toughness. You have never felt such pain.”

I paused as it became clear they were having trouble finding the fuse box or figuring how to cut the power. “It’s a shame,” I said. “There are a hundred and four easier and more efficient ways to do it. Why don’t you step out of that tub and I’ll tell you about them. Some are so quick you’re gone before you know it.”

It may seem that telling someone how to kill himself is anything but empathetic, but it was the only way I knew how to walk in the guy’s shoes. And it worked. Just before they cut the electricity, he sprang out of that tub.

The truth is, I don’t know how many ways there are to kill yourself. And I know very little about death by electrocution, except I understand it’s pretty quick. I know I’m not right about the eight to twelve minutes, but squatting there in uniform next to a desperate man, I must have looked and sounded like the world’s authority on the subject.

Okay, I was lying, but because I tried to empathize with the guy, I got in sync with him. He listened because I was working with him, trying to help him—if not to live then at least to die with less pain. He thought he wanted to kill himself; I promised I could help him get the job done better.

Admittedly, lying and trickery a re not things that easily transfer into your everyday relationships. I don’t recommend them. In this case, however, subterfuge was the only thing I could think of to empathize with the man. Though my story was fake, my concern was genuine, and he sensed it. My goal was to help him. Because I focused on him and his predicament, I was able to choose language that allowed him to see the situation as he hadn’t seen it before.
