# How To Read The Book - Discourses

---

This chapter focuses on discourses. We are using the term discourse to refer to units of connected text that are longer than paragraphs.  There are other terms we could have used (story, pericope, episode, unit of thought, chapter), but we like the fluidity of the term discourse. A discourse can be a smaller episode within a story (David and Goliath), or it can be the longer story itself (the David narratives). A discourse can be two related paragraphs in one of Paul’s letters. We are not hung up on the terminology or the definition.

**The Bible is not a collection of short, disconnected sentences or unrelated paragraphs.** The Bible is a story. Themes are intertwined throughout the text from paragraph to paragraph. Numerous markers and connections tie these paragraphs together.  `God’s message is not restricted to small units of text.` Much of the message of the Bible is embedded in larger units of text. Discovering this message requires us to make **observations at the discourse level.** How do we see or observe large chunks of text?

The answer is not complicated.  The basic discipline that you developed in chapters 3 and 4 involving focused, intensive observation is exactly the skill you need to sink your teeth into longer units of text. 

But first ... a lesson on observation from the master of observation, Sherlock Holmes.

---

## Lessons from Sherlock Holmes

One night — it was on the twentieth of March 1888 — I was returning from a journey to a patient (for I had now returned to civil practice), when my way led me through Baker Street. As I passed the well-remembered door, which must always be associated in my mind with my wooing, and with the dark incidents of the Study in Scarlet, I was seized with a keen desire to see Holmes again, and to know how he was employing his extraordinary powers. His rooms were brilliantly lit, and, even as I looked up, I saw his tall, spare figure pass twice in a dark silhouette against the blind. He was pacing the room swiftly, eagerly, with his head sunk upon his chest and his hands clasped behind him. To me, who knew his every mood and habit, his attitude and manner told their story. He was at work again. He had risen out of the drug-created dreams and was hot upon the scent of some new problem. I rang the bell and was shown up to the chamber, which had formerly been in part my own.

His manner was not effusive. It seldom was; but he was glad, I think, to see me. With hardly a word spoken, but with a kindly eye, he waved me to an armchair, threw across his case of cigars, and indicated a spirit case and a gasogene in the corner. Then he stood before the fire and looked me over in his singular introspective fashion.

“Wedlock suits you,” he remarked. “I think, Watson, that you have put on seven and a half pounds since I saw you.”
“Seven!” I answered.

“Indeed, I should have thought a little more. Just a trifle more, I fancy, Watson. And in practice again, I observe. You did not tell me that you intended to go into the harness.”
“Then how did you know?”

“I see it, I deduce it. How do I know that you have been getting yourself very wet lately, and that you have a most clumsy and careless servant girl?”

“My dear Holmes,” said I, “this is too much. You would certainly have been burned, had you lived a few centuries ago. It is true that I had a country walk on Thursday and came home in a dreadful mess, but as I have changed my clothes I can’t imagine how you deduce it. As to Mary Jane, she is incorrigible, and my wife has given her notice; but there, again, I fail to see how you work it out.”

He chuckled to himself and rubbed his long, nervous hands together. “It is simplicity itself,” said he. “My eyes tell me that on the inside of your left shoe, just where the firelight strikes it, the leather is scored by six parallel cuts. Obviously they have been caused by someone who has very carelessly scraped round the edges of the sole in order to remove crusted mud from it. Hence, you see, my double deduction that you had been out in vile weather, and that you had a particularly malignant bootslitting specimen of the London slavery. As to your practice, if a gentleman walks into my rooms smelling of iodoform, with a black mark of nitrate of silver upon his right forefinger, and a bulge on the right side of his top-hat to show where he has secreted his stethoscope, I must be dull, indeed, if I do not pronounce him to be an active member of the medical profession.”

I could not help laughing at the ease with which he explained his process of deduction. “When I hear you give your reasons,” I remarked, “the thing always appears to me to be so ridiculously simple that I could easily do it myself, though at each successive instance of your reasoning I am baffled until you explain your process. And yet I believe that my eyes are as good as yours.”

“Quite so,” he answered, lighting a cigarette, and throwing himself down into an armchair. “You see, but you do not observe.”

Sherlock Holmes continues to fascinate generation after generation through reprinted books, TV series, and updated movies. Likewise, the numerous Crime Scene Investigation shows on TV continue in the Sherlock Holmes tradition. The parallel between Sherlock Holmes’ method and the serious kind of close observation needed in Bible study is close indeed. But keep in mind that this is just an analogy. We are not just “observing” a set of facts and data and trying to solve a problem. We are entering a dialogue with the all-powerful and loving God. We want to hear correctly what he is saying to us so that we can grow closer to him and mature in our Christian lives.

---

## Things to Look for in Discourses

#### 1. Connections between Paragraphs and Episodes

After reading carefully and observing thoroughly at the sentence level and at the paragraph level, it is important to ask how your paragraph (in the letters) or your episode (in the narratives) relates to and connects with the other paragraphs/episodes that come before and after the one you are studying.

So far we have focused on the relationships between phrases, clauses, and sentences. We have looked at cause-and-effect relationships, general-to-specific relationships, conditional clauses with resultant or consequential effects, and other relational features within sentences and between sentences. These same features will also often connect paragraphs and episodes.

Look for connections. Look for repeated words or repeated themes. Look for logical connections like cause-and-effect. Be sure to note the conjunctions between the paragraphs. *In narrative episodes pay attention to the time sequence of each episode.* **Search for these connections. They are critical to the meaning.**

Example: Mark 8:22-26

> Taken by itself, this is a strange passage. Why does Jesus only heal the man partially at first? Is he unable to heal the blind person completely all at once? Why does Jesus ask the man if he can see anything? Doesn’t he know? Is he uncertain about his healing ability? At first the man can see nothing; then he can see partially, but not clearly. Finally, Jesus enables him to see clearly. Is there a point to this? Let’s look at the surrounding episodes and look for some connections. Perhaps the connections will help us understand this puzzling passage.
> 
> The previous episode is Mark 8: 14-21: Note the following observations:
> 
> 1. All three episodes are basically dialogues.
> 
> 2. In all three episodes Jesus asks a question.
> 
> 3. In the first episode (8:14–21) Jesus’ dialogue is with his disciples. In the third episode (8:27–30) Jesus’ dialogue is also with his disciples. The middle episode (8:22–26) is different: Jesus’ dialogue is with a blind man. In other words, the dialogue with the blind man is bracketed on both sides by a dialogue with the disciples. **Is there a suggested comparison or contrast?**
> 
> 4. The middle episode (8:22–26) mentions “the village” twice (8:23, 26). The third episode mentions “villages” (8:27).
> 
> 5. Jesus ends the blind man episode (8:22–26) by forbidding him to go back into the village. Jesus ends the third episode (8:27–30) by forbidding the disciples to tell anyone about him.
> 
> 6. The middle episode (8:22–26) revolves around terms related to seeing. Observe the following repetition:
>    
>    - a blind man (v. 22)
>    
>    - the blind man (v. 23)
>    
>    - he had spit on the blind man’s eyes (v. 23)
>    
>    - Do you see anything? (v. 23)
>    
>    - he looked up (v. 24)
>    
>    - I see people (v. 24)
>    
>    - they look like trees (v. 24)
>    
>    - Jesus put his hands on the man’s eyes (v. 25)
>    
>    - his eyes were opened (v. 25)
>    
>    - his sight was restored (v. 25)
>    
>    - he saw everything clearly (v. 25)
> 
> 7. In light of the preponderance of terms related to seeing in the blind man episode, it is interesting to note similar terms used in reference to the disciples in the first or preceding episode (8:14–21):
>    
>    - Do you still not see? (v. 17)
>    
>    - Do you have eyes but fail to see? (v. 18)
>    
>    This repetition of seeing in the first two episodes is undoubtedly an important connection between the two.
> 
> 8. **Note that seeing in the blind man episode is being used literally, referring to literal vision. In the first episode, however, seeing is used figuratively, referring to understanding.** Jesus makes this particularly clear when he states, “Do you still not see or understand?” (8:17). Jesus repeats this nuance as he ends the episode with the repeated question, “Do you still not understand?” (8:21)
> 
> 9. Peter’s statement in 8:29, “You are the Messiah,” indicates that Peter now understands who Jesus is, even though others may not. **In essence he now sees clearly.**
> 
> Conclusion about the connection. In the first episode Jesus asks his disciples some questions and realizes that they do not really understand who he is. **They see only partially.** By the third episode, however, **they see clearly**, acknowledging him as the Messiah. The middle story, the blind man episode, is **an illustration of the process that the disciples are experiencing.** It is not so much a story about Jesus’ healing as it is about a man’s seeing. He only sees partially at first, as do the disciples. Then he sees clearly, as do the disciples. So **the blind man episode is really an interruption in the flow of a section about the disciples’ understanding of Jesus. It provides a colorful, real-life illustration of what was occurring in the lives of the disciples.**

#### 2. Story Shifts: Major Breaks and Pivots

As you read larger units of text, look for critical places where **the story seems to take a new turn. In the letters this takes the form of a major break.** The writer will shift topics, frequently changing from doctrinal discussion to practical discussion. These shifts are important to note. Such shifts occur in narrative also, but they usually take the form of pivot episodes. **Usually a shift in the direction of the story will be signaled by an unusually significant episode.** Let's look at an example of each.

> In the first three chapters of Paul’s letter to the Ephesians, he presents a doctrinal explanation about the Ephesians’ new life in Christ and the implications of that new life, especially regarding the unity of Jews and Gentiles in that new life. Ephesians 4:1, however, signals a major break, for Paul now begins to give practical exhortations about how the Ephesians ought to put the doctrine of Chapters 1–3 into practice. **So while Chapters 1–3 deal primarily with doctrine, Chapters 4–6 focus on practical living.**

**One way to spot this kind of break is by closely observing the change in verbs.** In Ephesians 1–3 Paul uses a large number of “explanatory” or “descriptive” types of verbs. **There are almost no imperative verbs** in Chapters 1–3. For example:

- who has blessed us (1:3)

- he made known to us the mystery of his will (1:9)

- you were dead in your transgressions and sins (2:1)

- God made us alive (2:5)

- it is by grace you have been saved (2:5)

- God raised us up (2:6)

- he himself is our peace (2:14)

- this mystery is that through the gospel the Gentiles are heirs together with Israel (3:6)

Starting in Ephesians 4:1, however, **the imperative verbs dominate:**

- be completely humble (4:2)

- make every effort to keep the unity of the Spirit (4:3)

- you must no longer live as the Gentiles do (4:17)

- put off falsehood (4:25)

- do not give the devil a foothold (4:27)

- be kind and compassionate to one another (4:32)

- follow God’s example (5:1)

- be filled with the Spirit (5:18)

- husbands, love your wives (5:25)

- put on the full armor of God (6:11)

**This verb change signals the major shift in the book.** Overall, the two halves connect as a cause-and-effect relationship. *The cause is explained in Chapters 1–3* (what Christ has done for us and its implications), *while the effect is stated in Chapters 4–6* (live in a manner worthy of Christ and all he has done for us). A similar major break occurs between Romans 1–11 (doctrine) and Romans 12–16 (practical application).

`In narrative passages these shifts are usually episodes`. **They function as pivots because the story will pivot on that episode and take a new turn.** A good example occurs in 2 Samuel. In the first half of 2 Samuel the story is about David’s rise to power. Everything is going great for David. He wins the civil war and succeeds Saul as king (chs. 1–5). He conquers Jerusalem, brings the ark to his new capital, and receives a covenant from God (chs. 5–7). He wins all his battles, defeating the Philistines, Moabites, Arameans, Edomites, and Ammonites (chs. 8–10). Life is good for David and his nation.

The second half of the book, however, is incredibly different. Events in that half are almost all negative for the king. David’s oldest son, Amnon, rapes Tamar, Amnon’s half sister, prompting Absalom, Tamar’s brother, to kill Amnon (ch. 13). Next, Absalom, a son whom David loves, conspires against him, creating a bloody civil war. David is forced to flee Jerusalem. Eventually Absalom is defeated and killed, but David remains heartbroken (chs. 14–19). Next another rebellion arises (ch. 20). David then ends his career by fighting the Philistines again (ch. 21). In contrast to his earlier defeat of the Philistines (and his single-handed defeat of Goliath), David becomes exhausted and must be rescued by his troops; other heroes kill the giants this time (2 Sam. 21:15–22).

**The difference between the first half and the second half of 2 Samuel is striking.** The strong, victorious, confident David in the first half of the book is contrasted sharply with the insecure, weak, indecisive David in the second half. What happens in the middle that leads to this change? **Where does the pivot occur and what happens to bring it about?**

> The pivot event is in 2 Samuel 11–12. David sins by sleeping with Bathsheba and having her husband Uriah killed. Prior to this episode, David cruises through life as the beloved, respected, national hero; afterwards, David’s magnificent reputation begins to unravel. It is crucial for understanding 2 Samuel to see this pivot and to note the central role it plays in changing the direction of the story.

#### 3. Interchange

> Interchange is a literary device, used primarily in narrative, that involves contrasting or comparing two stories at the same time as part of the overall story development. Usually the narrative will move back and forth from one story to the other, often to show contrast.

The early chapters of 1 Samuel exhibit this feature. In the first few chapters the story develops two **contrasting** families. Eli, the fat, lazy priest, and his two decadent, disobedient sons, Hophni and Phinehas, are contrasted with devout Hannah and her pious, obedient son, Samuel. The two stories unfold at the same time, with
the narrative moving back and forth from one to the other. As you read narrative, look **for interchange between two different stories. Next look for some purpose in the interchange. Why does the author employ this literary device in the telling of his story?** In 1 Samuel the interchange is used to underscore the strong contrast between Samuel and the corrupt priesthood he replaces.

Another example, Luke also uses interchange in the middle chapters of Acts to present the transition in central characters from Peter to Paul. Peter is the central character in the first seven chapters. Paul (as Saul) is introduced in Acts 7:58; 8:1–3. Peter returns to center stage in 8:14–25 Paul (as Saul) is the focus in 9:1–30 (his conversion), but Peter has the important encounter with Cornelius in 10:1–11:18. Paul returns briefly in 11:19–30, followed by Peter’s miraculous escape from prison and his departure from Jerusalem in 12:1–19. In chapter 13, Paul moves onto center stage, and he remains the central character in the story for the next fifteen chapters.

**What is the purpose of the interchange in Acts?** What is Luke trying to say by switching back and forth? Clearly he is not contrasting a positive character with a negative character, as was the case in 1 Samuel. Both Peter and Paul are exemplary characters in Acts. In fact, **Luke seems to be stressing the similarities of the two.** Paul will do the same miracles that Peter does and preach as powerfully as Peter does. Luke uses interchange to demonstrate that Paul is as powerful (and authoritative) an apostle as Peter is and to show that the message of Christ that began with the Jews is spreading successfully to the Gentiles.

#### 4. Chiasm

Chiasm is a fascinating literary feature that is seldom used in English but is employed frequently by the biblical authors, especially in the Old Testament. In a chiasm a list of items, ideas, or events is structured in such a manner that the first item parallels the last item, the second item parallels the next to the last item, and so forth. For an illustration of chiasm consider the following silly example:

I got up this morning, got dressed, and drove into town. I worked hard all day, returned home, put on my PJs, and went to bed.



a I got up this morning
b got dressed
c and drove into town
d I worked hard all day
c’ returned home
b’ put on my PJs
a’ and went to bed



**Frequently in chiastic structures, if the middle event does not have a parallel, it functions as the main point or the focal point of the chiasm.** The stress of this ridiculous example is on the narrator’s working hard all day. **Often, however, there is no middle event in chiasm.** Consider Psalm 76:1

a God is renowned
b in Judah
b’ in Israel
a’ his name is great.



Sometimes chiasms are lengthy and complex. They can be subtle and difficult to notice. **There is often disagreement among scholars over whether the author intended the chiasm or whether perhaps the chiastic structure is merely the imagination of the reader.** A good example of chiastic structure Genesis 11: 1-9

a the whole world (11:1)
b had one language (11:1)
c Shinar and settled there (11:2)

d “Come, let’s make bricks” (11:3)
e “Come, let us build” (11:4)
f “a city, with a tower” (11:4)
g But the LORD came down (11:5)
f’ to see the city and the tower (11:5)
e’ the people were building (11:5)
d’ “Come, let us go down and confuse their language” (11:7)
c’ Babel — because there (11:9)
b’ the Lord confused the language (11:9)
a’ the whole world (11:9)

The evidence is rather convincing that Genesis 11:1–9 has been written in a chiastic literary form. Six specific words or concepts in the first half are paralleled in the second half. Note that the chiasm centers on the phrase in verse 5, “But the LORD came down.” **This is the central event in the story and focal point of the chiasm.**

#### 5. Inclusio

Inclusio is closely related to chiasm, but is not as complicated. Inclusio is a literary technique in which a passage (a story or a poem, etc.) **has the same or a similar word, statement, event, or theme at the beginning and at the end. This is also called “bracketing” or “framing.”** Psalm 8, for example, opens with, “LORD, our Lord, how majestic is your name in all the earth!” (Ps. 8:1). At the very end of the psalm we find the exact same statement, “LORD, our Lord, how majestic is your name in all the earth!” These two identical statements “frame” or “bracket” the rest of Psalm 8.

The inclusio is easy to spot if the beginning and end elements are completely identical, as in Psalm 8 (see also Eccl. 4:4–16). **However, often inclusio involves similar events or themes. Sometimes the beginning and ending brackets can be separated by several chapters of narrative.** For example, Joshua 3–6 is about how Israel prepares for and then captures the city of Jericho. This story is “framed” or “bracketed” by two stories about individual people. The story of Rahab (who believes and is saved) comes in Joshua 2 and the story of Achan (who disobeys God and is destroyed) comes in Joshua 7. **This inclusio indicates that the opening event (Rahab) and the closing event (Achan) provide critical context for understanding the bracketed material (Joshua 3–6, the capture of Jericho).**

---

## Conclusion

In order for us to interpret and understand the Bible, we must first read it carefully, observing all the details. We must observe it at the sentence level, at the paragraph level, and at the discourse level.

**Keep in mind that we are still only at the first step of grasping God’s Word.** Later in the book we will move on to discovering the meaning and applying the meaning. **These early chapters, however, are critical, because if you bypass the careful reading step and move straight to application after only a superficial reading, you will almost certainly miss the meaning of the passage.**  In addition, the Bible will become boring for you because you will never see anything in it that you haven’t already seen. If you read carefully, however, and observe, observe, observe, you will be much more likely to arrive at the true meaning, and the Bible will become interesting to you because you will be seeing new things.

> Because it is God’s Word, the Bible is a unique piece of literature. It is like a mine that never wears out. One can dig in it for a lifetime and not exhaust it. Likewise, when we study the Bible, we are engaging in a conversation with the infinite God. He is able, of course, to communicate with us in simple, surface terms. **But God wants us to go beyond that initial conversation. He himself is neither simple nor easily grasped by just skimming surface information. He has provided us with his written Word, which is rich and deep and sometimes complex.**



---

## Review

Below is a summary of chapters 3, 4, and 5. **Things to Observe**

- **Repetition of words** – Look for words and phrases that repeat.

- **Contrasts** – Look for ideas, individuals, and/or items that are contrasted with each other. Look for differences.

- **Comparisons** – Look for ideas, individuals, and/or items that are compared with each other. Look also for similarities.

- **Lists** – Anytime the text mentions more than two items, identify them as a list.

- **Cause and effect** – Look for cause-and-effect relationships.

- **Figures of speech** – Identify expressions that convey an image,
  using words in a sense other than the normal literal sense.

- **Conjunctions** – Notice terms that join units, like “and,” “but,” “for.” Note what they are connecting.

- **Verbs** – Note whether a verb is past, present, or future; active or passive; and the like.

- **Pronouns** – Identify the antecedent for each pronoun.

- **Questions and answers** – Note if the text is built on a question-and-answer format.

- **Dialogue** – Note if the text includes dialogue. Identify who is speaking and to whom.

- **Means** – Note if a sentence indicates that something was done by means of someone/something (answers “how?”). Usually you can insert the phrase “by means of” into the sentence.

- **Purpose/result statements** – These are a more specific type of “means,” often telling why. Purpose and result are similar and sometimes indistinguishable. In a purpose statement, you usually can insert the phrase “in order that.” In a result clause, you usually can insert the phrase “so that.”

- **General to specific and specific to general** – Find the general statements that are followed by specific examples or applications of the general. Also find specific statements that are summarized by a general one.

- **Conditional clauses** – A clause can present the condition by which some action or consequence will result. Often such statements use an “if ... then” framework (although in English the “then” is often left out).

- **Actions/roles of God** – Identify actions or roles that the text ascribes to God.

- **Actions/roles of people** – Identify actions or roles that the text ascribes to people or encourages people to do/be.

- **Emotional terms** – Does the passage use terms that have emotional energy, like kinship words (“father,” “son”) or words like “pleading”?

- **Tone of the passage** – What is the overall tone of the passage: happy, sad, encouraging, and so on?

- **Connections to other paragraphs and episodes** – How does the passage connect to the one that precedes it and the one that follows it?

- **Shifts in the story/pivots** – Is the passage being used as a key to understanding a dramatic shift in the story?

- **Interchange** – Does the passage shift back and forth between two scenes or characters?

- **Chiasm** – Does the passage have any chiastic arrangements, such as a-b-c-d-c′-b′-a′?

- **Inclusio** – Does the passage open and close with similar statements or events
