# The Five-Step Hard Style

#### Discovered The Hard Way

at the heart of persuasion is a five-step model I discovered the hard way in police work. It suggests that you 

1. Ask (Ethical Appeal)

2. Set Context (Reasonable Appeal)

3. Present Options (Personal Appeal)

4. Confirm (Practical Appeal)

5. Act (Determination of Appropriate Action).

I stopped another guy at about 3:00 A.M. He had ignored several stop signs, and when I approached his car I saw a whiskey bottle on the floor.

I softened my tone and said, “Sir, listen to me. There’s a whiskey bottle by your right leg. Now, sir, that constitutes under the law what we call an open-bottle charge. I have no choice but to have you step out, because I’m required to enter your vehicle and take a look at that bottle. For your safety and mine, sir, department policy says I have to ask you to step out. Would you do that for me?”

I switched from commanding to asking, and then I set the context by telling him why I was making my request.

The word contextis crucial in all communication. Context comes from the Latin contexo(contextus) or possibly the Latin con and texo. Both mean “weave together” or “join.”

One of the great psychological urges in this country is the desire to know. If you can tap in to that and let people know why you’re saying what you’re saying, you can usually generate voluntary compliance. Give them context. Weave together the elements of the situation.

Unfortunately, I had run into one of the few Difficult People not motivated by having the request put into context. This guy required my going to Step 3, presenting options and making a personal appeal, because he said, “I don’t know nothing about that bottle, Jack! I took a bunch of guys to a party last night and they drank whiskey. I don’t even drink whiskey. Not my bottle, not my problem. I’m not gettin’ out.”

I said, “Sir, listen, that’s an interesting distinction between whether it’s your bottle or your buddies’, but the law does not make that distinction. The law says, ‘Bottle in car, you driver, you responsible.’ Now, sir, that might not even be fair, but ’tis so under the law. I’d like to think you’d cooperate with me. Step on out, sir. I can check that bottle, then I can chat with you about why I stopped you in the first place. That way it looks as if you’re gonna be able to go home tonight, put your feet up, be with your family, eat at your own table, sleep in your own bed, and get up in the morning and go to work. I’d like to think you’d want to do that, sir, but the law gives you another option if you wish. The law says if you want, you can come with us, eat with us, stay overnight, sleep with us. That’s called an arrest. Now, I don’t see any need to do that. That’s a lot of paperwork for me, that’s towing your car, and you know they’ll put dents on that thing down at the yard. You don’t need that kind of trouble, do you, sir? Why don’t you give us both a break and cooperate with me and step on out of there?”

Those were options, not threats, and they worked. Specificity is one of the secrets of persuasion—helping people see what you want them to see. I tried to paint a picture of his going home, the problem over, contrasted with a picture of his coming with me, having his car towed, and going to jail.

#### The What-Ifs?

What if he hadn’t stepped out? Or what if your adversary still doesn’t cooperate when you’ve reached the third step of the Five-Step Hard Style? Unless you’re a cop, you may have met your match.

there’s a powerful sentence worth trying—and one you can use with your children, coworkers, or troublesome customers. It’s this: “Is there anything I can say or do at this time to earn your cooperation?” And then I always follow it with the optimistic “I’d sure like to think there is.”

Step 5. Interestingly for cops working in pairs is that the practical appeal question tips off the partner that Step 5 is next. If the perpetrator makes it clear that there is nothing that can be said or done to gain his cooperation, it’s time for action. I have alerted my partner, who is then moving to the next position, without having warned the subject.

“if you don’t do this I’m going to do that” approach, always warns people that we’re about to act, making them dangerously ready for us. If I say to a subject, “Get out or I’m going to take you out!” he may come at me with a razor blade. But my suggested sentence is so pleasant that it keeps him off-balance. It allows me to justify my action later in court and sound good, and it alerts my partner without alerting the perpetrator. Now if the guy says, “That ’s right, I’m not getting out,” the cop takes him out before he finishes the next sentence.

## Using This At Home

Most of us have not been trained to deal with teenagers. By the time they get to be thirteen or so, they enter the Why Generation.

For example, suppose I were to tell my son, “Taylor, before you go to the party, take the trash out.” I might hear something like “Hey, Dad, I haven’t got time to do it tonight. I’m in a rush. Why don’t you do it?” Why don’t I do it?Most of us would snap at that response. We don’t set context or lay out options. We just move right to Step 3 and turn options into threats: “Hey, you don’t take the trash out, you don’t go out!”

Of course, all that gets you from the teenager is “That’s unfair, I have to do everything, you never do anything, blah, blah, blah.” 

Why not pleasantly go to Step 2—setting context? “Taylor, remember when we agreed six months ago that your allowance would be partially based on getting that trash to the curb every Friday night, before going out? Why don’t you just keep your word and do it?”

For some kids, appealing to their honor works immediately, as it usually does with my son. But what if you have a difficult teenager? You’re apt to hear, “Yeah, well, I meant to talk to you about that allowance business, anyway. I’m fed up with that. Get someone else to take the trash out because I’m in a hurry.”

Now it’s time to go setting and creating options instead of threats. Something like this might work: “Taylor, listen, we agreed, ‘When cans by curb, Taylor out for parties.’ You don’t have to physically take them out; your job is to see that they get out. If you want to bribe your sister or get Mama to take them out or you want to use voodoo, I don’t care. No cans out, no party.”

At this point, most kids would probably do it. There’s been no assault on Taylor’s personal face, and he can maintain his dignity by simply taking the trash out. But suppose he doesn’t. Suppose he says, “I’m not gonna do it! I’m in a hurry!” Then you have no choice. You move right to Step 4. “Taylor, listen! Is there anything I can say or do at this time to earn your cooperation and get you to keep your word and take the trash out? I’d sure like to think there is.”

If he doesn’t, you can ground him, send him to his room, take away his allowance, or whatever punishment is appropriate in your house. But notice that he cannot blame you. In the end it was his choice. The punishment is an appropriate action based on a fourth step that he resisted. He had a right to resist. That’s how he earns his identity over time, flexing his muscles. We have to give our kids room to flex. If we’re always coming down on them, they can’t grow. But they must pay the consequences if they do not obey. Once the line is drawn, they must not cross it without punishment. Up to that point, we owe them the courtesy of looking for the keys to voluntary compliance.

The Five-Step Hard Style is a communication tactic that arms you to deal with difficult people under almost any condition. You are in the asking stage (Step 1), the setting the context (telling why) stage (Step 2), the presenting of options (in the other person’s best interest) stage (Step 3), or the confirming (that some kind of cooperation is either forthcoming or not) stage (Step 4). If not, you have to act (Step 5).
