# Representation

YOUR PRESENCE ANDyour words, when skillfully combined, are knowledge and power in action.

Contact is an interesting word from the Latin conmeaning “with” and tactmeaning “to touch on all sides.

You should take pride in your ability to get better under the pressure people put on you in the workplace. To be a contact professional who can handle any kind of stress, you must exude credibility and an aura of power.

We all have buttons and triggers, but if you’re going to work for others and represent them, you must not allow people to push your button or pull your trigger. The question is, how do you build a trigger guard? The answer: Know thyself. The old samurai used to say that if you don’t know yourself, you lose 100 percent of the time.

#### The "Wanna Bet?" Guy

I discovered very early on as a police officer that one thing I hated was having my authority challenged. There was always somebody who’d say in a nasty, whiny, contentious voice, “You can’t do that to me!” Immediately I would take a more aggressive, attacking stance, and each time I made errors I was not able to explain them on paper or justify them to a superior.

Here's how you handle 'em. First always define. Then, name them. Then you will own them.

Naming him was more difficult, but I finally decided to call him by the voice that went off inside of me. That voice always said, “Wanna bet?” So I called my enemy the “Wanna Bet?” Guy. I said to myself, “George, be careful of the ‘Wanna Bet?’ Guy or he’ll own you somewhere, sometime.”

The very next night I placed a young man under arrest, and he came back with “You can’t touch me. I’ll do what I want. My father’s on the city council; he’ll have your job!”

Immediately I thought, Wanna bet?But at the same time, a warning bell also went off in my head. There he is, the “Wanna Bet?” Guy! Be careful! He’s gonna get you!

I literally took a step back, forcing myself to remain calm and not say or do anything that would jeopardize the integrity of that very legitimate arrest. I wanted the bust, all right, and I wanted it to stick because of the kid’s snotty attitude. I could have lost it all—and maybe even my job—if I had let him get to me and make me do something stupid. I didn’t, and hegot in big trouble.

y trigger has been cocked, but you can’t pull it. My trigger guard is in place. I defined my enemy, and I named him. Now I own him, rather than the other way around. What is your enemy? Define it. Name it. Own it.

#### The Teddy Bear Truth

I remained so intrigued by the power of that truth that about ten years later I asked a psychologist why it worked. He told me that when we define our weaknesses, or our so-called communication enemies, we actually bring them out and make them part of our consciousness. We admit them, bringing them into the light of recognition. We can name only that which we own, so when we name them, we acknowledge that we have taken ownership of them.

If you’ve ever taken your child to a store and bought him a teddy bear from a whole group of similar-looking bears, you know that by the time you’ve gotten to the counter, your child has named the bear. And if that teddy bear is ever misplaced or missing, you see your child bereft and heartbroken because by naming it, he has made it part of who he is.

Make a list of your most harmful weaknesses. Then name them. Give each a little tag and pin it wriggling to the wall of definition. Then you own them. Once you ’re in control inside, you can be in control outside.

#### Representation

When you speak, you are a mouthpiece, a representative. You do not represent your own ego. Remember, the more ego you show, the less power you have over people. Egotists only create conflict. The great communicators put their egos behind them and put the purpose and goal of communication before them. Nobody likes people whose personalities intrude.

If you’re in a retail business, your job is to represent your organization in such a way as to not only get customers to buy the first time, but also to ensure they’ll want to come back again and again. Nordstrom’s was the first of many companies that has learned this art. It gave people pride in the organization.

Every time you open your mouth, you represent the boss, whether that is the chief of police, the mayor, the company president or CEO, or whoever. You speak for him and for everyone else who works in the organization.

#### Under The Influence

Your customer or client or citizen is under various kinds of influence. He may be under the influence of anxiety, fear, misunderstanding, ignorance, rage, even liquor and drugs. You have to learn to read people carefully. The old samurai who said that if you don’t know yourself, you lose 100 percent of the time, also said, “If you know yourself but you do not know the opponent, you’ll be lucky to win fifty percent of the time. If you know yourself and you know the opponent, you can win a hundred percent of the time.”

That means one of the greatest communication skills is listening, really listening to people—to what they say and how they say it.


