# What Makes THis All So Difficult

What makes communication so difficult is another of my undeniable, inarguable, street-survival truths: When two people are talking, six different identities are involve —each person’s real self, each person as he is seen by himself, and finally, each person as seen by the other, doubled.

The way the other person sees himself is monumental for you to understand. I’ve never had anyone say, “I’m an idiot. I’m off the wall. I’m a jackass. I’m stupid, illiterate, and dumb, but here’s what I think.” **People don’t go around thinking they’re irrational**, especially when they truly are. So never put a person down. Focus on the goal of gaining voluntary compliance, and **always allow a person to save face**.

We know the least about our real selves. That’s why we must deal with how we see ourselves. Our real selves may consist of where we come from, our beliefs and values, and the way we’re raised. But ourselves as we see them will be bogus unless we make an effort to really be `honest and introspective`. If we don’t, we will always have areas that can be exploited and can make us less effective than we could be.

The way **we are seen by others is vital**, because we have a lot to say about determining that.

When dealing with somebody in a business or a law enforcement situation, you may be thinking I’m handling this well. I’m firm, fair, and professional. But **if the other person sees you as pushy and aggressive, as ineffective, biased, and intemperate, where does the truth lie?**

Unfortunately, it `lies with how you’re seen and not with how you see yourself`—even if you are right.

#### Elements of Communication

From the receiver’s point of view, there are three elements of communication from which he will take his cues.

Your voice carries a weight of 33 to 40 percent. The facts don’t speak for themselves in court, in an arrest situation, in your office, or at home. People aren’t buying what you say; they’re concentrating on **how you’re saying it**.

In spite of that, you still have to be right, because should you be wrong about a single detail, you lose credibility. Lose credibility and you lose belief. When people stop believing in you, you lose power and influence. You’re history.

#### Baby, It's You

If voice is so important, what do I mean by it? No guesswork here. Voice is your verbal personality as heard by the other. Remember the first time you heard your voice on a tape recorder? Like most of us, you probably said, “Hey, that doesn’t sound like me! That’s not me, is it?”

Bad news: That’s you, baby! That’s you with the monotone voice, the gravelly voice, the condescending voice, the unpleasant voice. If our voices are as powerful as research shows, we’d better know as much as we can about them, and how to improve them.

There are four elements to voice. 

1. **Tone**, is the most deadly four-letter word I know.
   
   Why is tone so powerful? Because it conveys your real attitude toward people. To a customer your words may be, “Yes, sir, I’m doing everything I can to help you,” but if you have a negative, condescending tone of voice to go with them, do you know what the customer hears? In his mind he tacks something onto the end of that sentence that has come through so loud and clear that he believes you said it. He hears, **“I’m doing everything I can to help you, you idiot!”**
   
   > The only way to be careful enough with your voice to keep its tone from giving away your true feelings is to be sure there’s harmony between the role you’re playing and the voice you’re using.
   
   You’re a cop and a lady asks you for directions to the convention hall. You snap, “Ma’am, you’re standing right in front of it!” What does she hear in her mind at the end of that sentence? “.  .  .  you fool!”
   
   Now you know she didn’t miss that tone. If she’s a Nice Person, she just takes that insult and goes away, feeling bad. She’ll say, “Thank you,” and walk off, thinking, Gee, I thought they were supposed to help me.
   
   If she’s a Difficult Person, she’ll say, “Hey, thanks a lot, Officer! Really appreciate that! Let me tell you something. I’ve had it with you people.” Now she’s in your face, and she wants your badge number. You’re in deep trouble.
   
   If she’s a Wimp, you’re even worse off. She takes the insult and says, “Thank you,” but while she’s at the convention she’s sitting on that insult, and it is inflating her with righteous adrenaline. She’ll be thinking, I should have said something. This is outrageous! I don’t have to put up with this.

2. **Pitch**, Pitch is how high or low and how loud and soft you speak.
   Cops also listen to pace and pitch to tell them whether people are getting more upset or coming to a decision that may not be good. 

3. **Pace**, is your speed.
   
   If someone’s voice picks up speed, watch out! He’s getting excited and something may happen. If the voice slows down, he’s thinking, which may be positive or negative—so be careful.

4. **Modulation**, is our rhythm and inflection.
   
   If you want to calm somebody, modulate your voice as you assure him, “Listen, it’s going to be all right.” That’s a whole lot different than “Listen! I’m doing everything I can, so calm down!”

#### Proximics

Proximics is a fancy word for proximity, or the way you stand around and carry yourself in your space. If 50 to 60 percent of your power and effectiveness in face-to-face encounters has to do with your ONVs, it only makes sense **to work on your facial expressions, how you use your hands, and how you carry yourself**.
Your ONVs must harmonize with your voice. **If your voice is calming, your demeanor has to be calming**. Otherwise, people will not believe what you’re saying. Remember, 93 percent of your success with people has to do with your delivery and only the slightest percent has to do with what you say.

#### Lights, Camera, Acting!

The presentation of self is terribly important. If I had my way, I’d send everyone to acting school before having him or her deal with the public and perform eight to ten hours a day.


