# Readin', 'Ritin', and Rhetoric

Rhetoricis an interesting word often used in the modern idiom to mean a bunch of words and no substance, such as “That’s just rhetoric.” But the word has classical roots. Used by Aristotle, it was a word of dignity. It meant `the art of verbal appeal or verbal persuasion`.
To me, rhetoric is the art of finding the right means and the right words to generate voluntary compliance.

#### The Third "R"

I have developed an acronym PAVPO, the five components of what I call the rhetorical perspective of Verbal Judo:

- ###### Perspective
  
  Perspective is simply the way you see things, **your point of view**, based on your knowledge, your understanding of the situation, your background, and your experience.
  
  Too many people believe that preparing what they want to say is the end-all of effective communication. As important as that is, disregarding the other areas is an error, as I will show you. But first let me address this issue of your own point of view.
  
  The more thoroughly you know what you know, the more powerfully you will present it. **You will have an aura of certainty that comes only with preparation**. There is no substitute for knowing what you want to say and having the data to back it up.
  
  For example, if I go before the City council to appeal for more money for my budget area, I will spend what time is necessary gathering my data and creating charts that compare my department with others. My evidence and arguments will be all marshaled. I will be prepared to control my emotions and biases and to plead my case from a position of strength.
  
  > My perspective, based on my expertise, will come through because I know what I’m talking about and I’m under control.

- ###### Audience
  
  Many people, after their preparation, just go out before an audience and begin to speak, but that’s a crucial blunder. **You must spend equal time considering your audience, analyzing to whom you will be speaking**.
  
  Who are these people on the city council, for example? If there are eight people on the council, I must study all eight individually. What are their values, their belief systems? How do they think? Who are their constituents? What will their objections likely be?
  
  I have to think carefully from **their point of view**. Once again, that powerful word empathycomes into play. I want to think like the others, **put myself into their shoes**, anticipate their reactions based on my knowledge of the positions from which they will be listening.
  
  Depending on my reading of these people I may open differently. For example, if I know that they ’re highly analytical people or that at least several are antagonistic, I will probably open with a series of examples of data comparison, factually showing that my need for money is real.
  
  If it’s kind of a good ol’ boy city council, I might start out being much more chatty and informal. If they are self-righteous and see me as an underling who should be deferential, I’ll be that and maybe a little self-effacing with some self-deprecating humor. When they're impressed and know that I know my place, I will earnestly prove my need for funds and hope for the best.
  
  You are playing a role before others, and you should be aware of the dynamics of each situation. For example, when I teach I often suddenly pull a camera out of my bag and point it at the students.
  
  Immediately the room changes. Everything becomes still and silent, and then there’s some nervous giggling, people looking down, others warily looking at that camera, wondering what I’m doing with it. Think of yourself as that camera. As you enter a scene, it changes.
  
  > You can make two assumptions right off the bat. 
  > 
  > 1. People will always see differently than you.
  > 
  > 2. As you enter, you’re very much like an actor appearing onstage. The audience quiets and they watch.
  
  If an actor does a poor job and the audience says he’s terrible, it makes no difference that the actor thinks he did a brilliant job. How he sees himself, remember, is not as important as how he’s seen. If an audience thinks you’re boring, you are. If an audience thinks you don’t know what you’re talking about, you don’t. You’ve got a problem. **You’ve failed to perform in such a way as to get their attention**. More than likely you failed to analyze in advance who those people really are, what they might think, what they might anticipate, what their objections might be. If you had, then as you entered the scene, your walk and your voice would have appropriately matched their needs.

- ###### Voice
  
  See Chapter 16.

- ###### Purpose
  
  Your bottom line: the result you must professionally achieve. If you do everything else right and don’t achieve your purpose, obviously, you’ve failed.
  
  If all you care about is the means and not the end, you’ll be thrilled if you perform well. As for me, I’m into results. **I want to see the purpose achieved, even if everything else doesn’t go perfectly**.

- ###### Organization
  
  Organization is simply how you want the encounter to unfold from beginning to middle to end. The responsibility for ordering the event is yours, and you will, of course, organize it based on your reading of the situation.
  
  Take the average, everyday, nonfelony car stop. At one time or another you have likely been stopped by the police, so you can identify with this and compare it with your experience.
  
  The average police officer not trained in tactical communication tends to approach a car and immediately snap, “Let me see your driver’s license!”
  
  To which the driver often responds, “Why? What have I done? Why are you stopping me?”
  
  Notice that all the initial verbal conflict arises from the fact that the officer asked for the driver’s license first. What if he asked for it later, anticipated the questions, and answered them before they were asked? (One of my pet peeves is the officer who studies the license and then asks, “Do you know why I stopped you?” What is that? A quiz? Most fully functioning adults know a setup when they see one. Who’s going to give him what he needs to write a ticket? The obvious answer, even if you have an idea what you might have done, is “No, why did you stop me?” What does the cop expect? Surely not an answer like “Yes, Officer, I know why you stopped me. I was speeding, driving recklessly, ignoring stop signs, and drinking in the car.)
  
  However, I teach across the country what I call a Nine-Step Car Stop. It has a far different order from the way most officers are trained. It goes like this:
  
  1. **Greeting** => Greetings with smile to break the ice.
  
  2. **Identification of yourself and department** => Establishing comman presence, clarity, and an unafraid approach.
  
  3. **Reason for the stop** => Reason right up front.
  
  4. **Justification** => Is there a reason to justify driver action.
  
  5. **Request license, papers, and cooperation**
     
     By now the encounter, rather than starting as usual with this threatening step, sound more like polite.
  
  6. **Clarification** => If there's anything more I need to know.
  
  7. **Decision** => Only 3 for police officer. He can warn you, let you go, or cite with a ticket.
  
  8. **Search and seize** => Necessary only if the officer sees resistance by physical.
  
  9. **Close** => Close the encounter. "Thank you for your cooperation. Do drive carefully."

#### But I'm a Civilian

First, make it your goal, your business, to win the person over. No matter what is said, you’re going to deflect the abuse, not take it personally, remain professional, and keep your eyes on the purpose. You want what the customer wants: satisfaction and a happy result. Let nothing stand in the way of that.

#### Worth Memorizing

Jot my rhetorical approach on a card and carry it with you until you have memorized it: PAVPO—Perspective, Audience, Voice, Purpose, and Organization.


