# Hot to Diagnose a Verbal Encounter

Diagnose a verbal encounter and thus skillfully deal with people under pressure is PACE: Problem (situation you’re in), Audience (to whom are you speaking), Constraints (obstacles to effective communication), and Ethical presence (your professional face).

#### Problem

If I had stopped at my problem and begun my discourse there, I’d have yet a third problem, bigger than either of the two I had already. I saw the man as the problem; he saw the boy as the problem. If I had approached him as if he were the problem, he would have merely disagreed and resisted, and at worse killed the boy and maybe some of us cops in the process.

How the other person sees it. And he will never see it the way you do, especially if he’s crazy (or under any other influence or delusion).The only way to succeed in these situations is to define the problem from the other person’s point of view first.

> I had to see the problem as he did so I could seem to be working with him to get it solved.

#### Audience

The question in this context is how your audience differs from you. What made that man different from me? How did he see the event differently? What were his values and beliefs?

#### Constraints

This man’s rage, his brain damage, his influence, his belief systems, all were obstacles. There is only one of three things you can do with a restraint: **step around it, ignore it, or use it**. I ignored his hatred and distrust of cops. I let his threat to kill me fly by

Knowing what makes your audience different from you allows you to adapt, show empathy, and work with them. If they’re in left field, you’ve got to use left-field language.

#### Ethical Presence

Show concern at all times. Again, sometimes you’re bluffing, and frankly, I don’t apologize for misleading an easily misled crazy person who is a threat to someone else’s life.
