## The Language of Reassurance

I am amazed at the simplicity of communication. Even I have had to codify and systematize the discipline, but I’ve found that if you learn the underlying principles, you don’t need to remember every detail of the training.

Consider the language of calming people down, what I call the language of reassurance. There may be a hundred different ways to calm people, but I believe there’s only one principle that underlies all those techniques. It consists of three words `Empathy Absorbs Tension`.

When I say there are hundreds of techniques to do this, I’m referring to all those little things people do that prove that it works. In other words, no matter what approach you choose, if the result somehow shows empathy, tension will be absorbed, and you have begun to succeed in Verbal Judo. Can’t remember one of my acronyms? Do something to empathize. Forgot which step comes next in a list of suggestions? **Empathize, empathize, empathize**.

#### Calm Down and Speak English

Now a surefire way to escalate tension is to break a cardinal rule of calming someone **(by shouting, “Calm down!”) and insult him in the process**.

How many different techniques are there like the book and the pen or the hat and the card? People to whom English is a second or third language will resort to their own tongue when they get upset. Their communication skills abandon them, and it’s up to you and me to find creative ways to calm them. I never knew such things when I was teaching English, because I didn’t have to. On the street I had to come up with a hundred such techniques.

#### Principally, Stick to the Principles

For example, one of the major principles in empty-hand control is “Go to a weak area when grabbed.” In other words, if someone grabs your wrist, turn it back toward his thumb, the weakest area. You can slip away easily.

There may be a hundred ways to calm people, but the bottom line is, empathy absorbs tension. If you keep that in your mind when you deal with your children, your spouse, or an angry customer, you’ll be able to use my other techniques with ease and skill.


