# Motivating the Disagreeable

Teaching is the process of moving people from what they know to what they don’t know. And I’ve found the best way to teach a motivated student is to appeal to his consciousness with a very small element of language, a metaphor and a simile, which is understandable to him so he can understand what is being taught.

A dry, boring teacher talks about what he knows, as if the student should have a clue. Unless that teacher compares it to something within the range of that student’s experience, little learning takes place.

Often the best way of reading your target audience is to see the person the way he sees himself. Which is the true essence of empathy. Then, **using the language of your audience, you can make the strange become familiar.**

For example, you’ll see case histories here where a cop is trying to calm a frightened, potentially violent troublemaker. In the classic macho approach, the cop would challenge the guy: “Put that knife down or I’ll take you out! You haven’t got a chance. I’ll blow your head off,” things like that. That virtually forces the man to attack, to defend his manhood, to save face.

But what if that cop gently empathizes and says, “Hey, friend, let’s do each other a favor. You don’t want to spend the night downtown with us, eating our food, sleeping on our steel cot, and missing your woman. And I don’t want to sit at a typewriter for a couple of hours doing paperwork on this. If we can work this out, you can have dinner at your own table, be with your woman, and wake up in your own bed tomorrow morning. And I can go back about my business.”
