# How to Fight Fair

Have you ever wondered why you or your spouse seem bitchy and mean-spirited about things that seem to have nothing to do with anything? That’s a description of someone who needs to deal with the issues at hand. A clean, effective verbal confrontation is designed to strengthen, rather than damage, a relationship.

#### Four Steps to a Good Domestic Dispute

It simply goes like this: (1) Paraphrase. (2) Paraphrase again. (3) Refocus the other’s attention. (4) Say what you want to say.

#### Parphrase

First employing a trusty Sword of Insertion like “Whoa!” follow with “Wait a minute, darling [totally without sarcasm—you’re reaffirming your affection, even in the heat of battle, subliminally establishing that your goal is to make things right and maintain the relationship]. **Let me be sure I hear what you’re saying**. [Here comes the paraphrase.] **You’re angry at me because you think I come home every night and do everything I can to purposely undermine you in front of the children. Is that the way you feel?”**

#### Parphrase again

“Okay, darling, you’re angry at me because for the last three nights I have come home and purposely tried to undermine you in front of your children.”

With just a little careful, loving counteraction, the husband has already seen his disgruntled wife lower her charge from “you always purposely do this” to “at least you did it the last three nights and I’m not saying it was on purpose.”
That’s a significant modification. She has been cooled a hundred degrees.

#### Refocus the Other's Attention

Still in a conciliatory tone, the husband should now say something like **“Let me ask you something. What specifically did I do the last three nights that led you to believe I was trying to undermine you?”**
After a pause while she thinks about it, he will likely be hit with some serious data. “Well, you did A, B, and C! That’s what you did!” Now he has something concrete to work with.

#### Say What You Want to Say

The husband needs to state his case, all the while convincing his wife that he has the relationship at heart. **In himself he might want only to defend himself, to react in anger for being what he feels is falsely accused.**

This is another of those times to bury the ego, take a lump or two, and concentrate on persuading your opponent that you’re as interested in preserving the relationship as she is.
So, he says, “Let me ask you something, hon. **Could we talk about the difference between what I do and what I intend to do? I didn’t marry you two months ago to destroy the relationship, but I’m doing something wrong. Can we talk about it?”**


