# Take the GIant LEAPS

an acronym: LEAPS.

- Listen

- Empathize

- Ask

- Paraphrase

- Summarize

So, though I have fit them into the acronym for easier remembering, I don’t want you to think of them as sequential. Rather, think of them as ongoing, changing skills you must use to be effective with people, especially those under pressure.

#### Listen

When you listen you’ve got to look like you’re listening. **Project a face that makes it obvious**. Frankly, if I had to choose between listening carefully and appearing to listen carefully, I’d opt for the latter. People often say things that are not worth hearing; you’ve heard them all before. A person may not even make sense. But the moment your eyes glaze over as if you’re uninterested or don’t care, conflict can erupt. So it’s even more important to lookinterested than to beinterested.

Being open, literally hearing, interpreting, and acting.

#### Empathize

Let me clarify that while empathizing essentially means standing in the shoes of another or seeing through the eyes of another, I’m not suggesting you have to agree with that person. Don’t agree; just try to understand where the person is coming from.

Too many people confuse empathy with sympathy.You don’t have to sympathize with or approve of another’s actions or words. Just empathize and see how powerful it makes you. Don’t do it to be nice; do it because it’s the only way to hit upon a proper appeal.

There are four types of appeals you can make to people to try to get them to voluntarily comply with your wishes: the Ethical, the Reasonable, the Personal, and the Practical. **Empathizing will help determine which of these might be most effectively initially.**

The most powerful professional presence you can project is with a straight Ethical Appeal. The word ethical comes from the Greek ethos,meaning “self.” In this case, it’s your persona, your professional service face. Because of your role and carriage and bearing, this approach is seen and felt by others and forcefully establishes your credibility.

If people believe in you, in your service, in your desire to help, often that in itself is enough to generate voluntary compliance. The moment the people you’re dealing with begin to think you don’t like them, or that you’re irritated, or you don’t like what you’re doing, you lose the ethical appeal.

Then you have to solicit reason by moving to what I call the Reasonable Appeal. Because people are not always logical, especially when under duress, I have a basic rule with this one: Never use it when people are upset. First calm them, then try logic. Remember, under pressure common sense is a most highly uncommon commodity.

When you’re setting context in Step 2 of the Five-Step Hard Style, you are using the reasonable appeal. You’re saying, “This is policy, this is procedure, these are the grounds I have to stand on, these are my constraints.” This approach alone will calm many people.

With truly difficult people the third appeal, Personal Appeal, tends to be most powerful. Why? Because with this appeal you’re putting what you want them to do in terms of what they have to gain or lose. Are most people selfish? You bet they are. So hook into their attention span.

The fourth appeal is a strange one I call the Practical Appeal. This involves the use of offbeat strategies—like humor, redirection, and refocusing—that will gain voluntary compliance, provided they do not compromise your safety or integrity or violate your organization’s policies.

> When faced with resistance, try varying your appeal, but always display empathy.

#### Ask

###### Fact-finding (who, what, when, where, why, and how)

Fact-finding questions ask for specific data. Most people are naturally pretty good at these because they often concern practical matters and require only clear-cut answers. But they don’t often have the best effect on people.

###### General

By definition, general questions are open-ended, for example, “What really happened here today?” In reply, a person can say anything he wants. This allows him to choose the direction of his answer and makes him feel good.

###### Opinion-seeking

Like general questions, opinion-seeking questions ask for an opinion and allow latitude. You might ask, “Is there some way we can solve this problem?

This approach is very powerful, because most everyone likes to voice his opinion. Even if you’re not terribly interested in the answer, ask anyway, and remember to look interested and make it obvious that you’re listening. You may be surprised. The person might even have something profitable to say.

###### Direct

Direct questions are basically your yes and no questions. “Did you dump the garbage on this man’s lawn?” “Did you go to so-and-so’s house?” “Did you spend the money?”
Though the questions may not in themselves be antagonistic, too many direct questions in a row can make people feel machine-gunned. I had a problem with this when I was a new cop because I was more interested in getting information for my reports than I was in being empathetic with those involved.

###### Leading

Leading questions almost always anger people because essentially they put words into their mouths. “Isn’t it true that  .  .  .  ?”
You need to be as strategic as possible in your questioning, and I recommend two tactics.

1. Try setting context for people before launching into your questions. I call it `forecasting`. In other words, simply explain the direction and purpose of your questioning. Don’t just start firing questions. Say, “Friend, I have six or seven questions here, mostly concerning the cause of your trouble. I wonder if you’d be willing to work with me and try to answer them?” If people don’t know how many questions you have, what they’re about, and that you’re going to stop, they become impatient and tenser as you go on. It’s always appropriate to tell people what you’re about. It calms them and makes them more cooperative, and that means the nature of the information you get will be far better.

2. Vary your questions. This also lessens resistance and calms an audience. Start with a series of general questions to loosen people up, then ask some opinion-seeking questions. Gradually, naturally, move to the more direct and fact-finding questions. Resort to leading questions only when necessary.
   Of my five types of questions, **the general and the opinion-seeking do more to generate voluntary compliance than the other three put together. They make you appear empathic, caring, open, and unbiased, whether or not you really are. Direct and leading questions anger people much of the time.**
   
   The moment you see in the eyes of someone that he is becoming tense, you know he’s probably feeling attacked. That’s the time to move right back to a general question.

#### Paraphrase

When someone comes at you with verbal abuse, forget the tone and the emotion. Put the complaint in your own words and play it back for him. Even if you’ve misunderstood, he can see that you’re trying, and he’ll want to help you get it straight.

#### Summarize

Summarizing is a different use of language altogether. By definition it means condensing, taking all that’s been discussed and putting it into a simple, concise statement.

It must be brief, concise,and, above all, inarguable.

Another benefit of summarizing is that it can reconnect communication when it’s been interrupted. Interruptions are one of the phenomena of modern-day communication.

> “Miscommunication is the sand in the gears of modern technology.” We all make mistakes every day, but listening, empathizing, asking, paraphrasing, and summarizing can go a long way to making you more effective.
