# Persuasion for Fun and Profit

DON’T EXPECT VOLUNTARY compliance just because you have a position of authority or responsibility. Generate it. Make it happen.

In other words, avoid the disastrous use of language best summed up in the old Chinese adage, “Control your emotion, or it will control you.”

Doesn’t it make sense that we should develop a mind-set that allows us to interact with these people skillfully, rather than letting them get our goat? The samurai warrior, when surrounded by attackers, went absolutely still inside. He prepared himself by being still so he would not be caught by surprise. He could respond to an attack from any direction, no matter how unexpected.

Train yourself to be free of bias, prejudice, and expectation. That’s easier said than done, of course, and I’m the first to admit that it isn’t something that comes naturally. There is a Chinese word that means both “crisis” and “opportunity.” By remembering that, I am now able to like Difficult People, or at least to appreciate where they’re coming from and view them as challenges and opportunities rather than obstacles.

#### Avoiding the Inner Voice

Inside, your voice may be saying what you really want to say. But one of the laws of effective communication is to never utter the inner voice. The inner voice is almost always negative. **Control it at all costs and you’ll find yourself way ahead of the game.**

#### Personalization

One of the last things our inner voice wants to do when encountering Difficult People is to give our name. I don’t care whether you’re a homemaker, a parent, a banker, an executive, a salesperson, or a service employee—you become more human when I know your name. And don’t just offer it mechanically. It shouldn’t be “Hi! I’m Stacey and I’ll be your waitress.” Slow it down. Give it some weight, some sincerity.

Nothing angers me more than when I call an agency and get a receptionist who gives me only a number. “This is two-four-four, sir. How may I help you?” I want to say that person can help me by telling me who I’m dealing with. I want a name. Names have a way of calming people.

**Even in a store, it helps if the clerk at the counter says, “Hi, I’m Beverly. Let me know if there’s any way I can help you,” rather than simply, “Can I help you?”**

#### 
