# The Misunderstood Motivator

The misunderstood motivator is Praise. When I’m praised correctly—and there are myriad incorrect ways to offer praise—I feel most understood and appreciated.

Have you ever felt suspicious when praised? You’re not alone. I believe suspicion of praise is universal because it so frequently precedes criticism (which I will discuss). For example, “I really enjoyed your solo. It was beautiful. Now can I give you a few hints on your wardrobe and stage presence?” See how this compliment was yanked away like a rug from under the singer?

Regardless, I contend that praise remains the most effective motivator and disciplinarian there is. Effective and genuine praise does far more than make people feel good. They tend to do voluntarily what they are praised for. But if they are criticized they will do just what they need to to get by.

Offering praise communicates and reinforces your values. And when praise is specific—as I will discuss more fully—it appears more authentic and increases your credibility, regardless of your role.

#### Praise as Part of Your Arsenal

My first praise principle is that if you plan to praise people, **never follow it with criticism**. If you do, from then on, whenever people hear a compliment from you (no matter how sincere), they will also hear in their minds, “.  .  .  but.  .  .”

**If you must, criticize first, then leave them with praise.**

One of the ways has to do with where you insert praise into the conversation: last, not first. Not first and last with a criticism sandwiched in between either. That’s a popular management recommendation, but I think people see through that as easily as they see through the compliment-then-criticism technique. Whatever came before the “but  .  .  .” **he no longer believes because it was an obvious setup**. Whether it really was or not is irrelevant. If that’s the way he feels, that’s reality to him.

The second way to effect the sincerity of praise is to make it as **specific as possible**. It’s much better when someone says—to use the singing example again—“I enjoyed your solo, especially the song you selected and the way you interpreted that chorus. I felt as if I were young and in love again.”

#### The Benefits of Specific Praise

1. Specific praise feels good. It made me feel good. The specificity of his praise reached me as no general praise could have.

2. Specific praise is believable. Because he had been specific, I believed him.

3. Specific praise always either reinforces or teaches. It made me learn something about myself as a speaker.
   I have always been a storyteller, but until that guy pointed out that the specific detail of my illustrations made my points come alive for him, I didn’t know. I might have drifted from that technique, but once I knew it was effective, I went back and emphasized stories and illustrations for all my presentations. His specific praise taught me to be a better speaker.

4. Specific praise gets passed along. Two years later I ran into a guy in Jacksonville, Florida, who said, “Are you that crazy guy from Albuquerque who teaches Verbal Judo? I’ve got a friend  in Chicago who raved about your course. He couldn’t remember your name but he never forgot what you did.”
   I said, “What was that?”
   He said, “You taught with specific little stories the way Einstein taught physics. My friend had to give a presentation before his bosses and he completely redid it based on that one principle alone. And he gave the best speech.”

> It pays to listen and watch and take that extra time to look at what somebody does that makes you feel good. Then, **instead of just blurting, “Great job!” be specific.**

#### Criticism Without Ostracism

You can, and many times should, deliver criticism effectively, directly, and even bluntly. As the flip side of the praise principle, the trick here is to follow the criticism—not precede it—with praise. That way, despite his mistakes, the person being corrected and criticized will still feel a part of the team, a valued player. If praise is doled out before criticism, as is usually the case, the person will feel manipulated. **Often it’s appropriate to remind the person, “If I didn’t value you and care about you, or if I wasn’t concerned with how you fit into the organization, I wouldn’t bother to deal with you about this problem.**

#### When You Are Criticized

1. Maintain eye contact. That is a sign of resignation or defeat. Look the person in the eye and indicate that you’re listening.

2. If you disagree, hold your tongue for the time being. If you constantly interrupt to correct an inaccuracy or plead your case, you’re going to look worse. Maybe you’re right and the criticizer is wrong. Still, arguing and appearing defensive will only make the person believe more strongly that he is right. The time may come when it is appropriate to defend yourself, but gather your thoughts first and be prepared to discuss them calmly, just to try to balance the record.

3. Nod and show an open body language that says you’re not only listening, You’re not necessarily agreeing, but you’re getting the message.

4. Use phrases that confirm your openness to be corrected such as “Uh-huh,” “Yes,” “Okay,” “I hear you,” “I understand what you’re saying,” “I’m willing,” “I’ll make every effort,” “I’ll work on that,” “Thanks for pointing that out.”

5. Then you have the floor, use the opportunity not only to defend yourself but also to reiterate that you welcome such input and want to learn. Insist on a follow-up meeting with a request such as “Could I check back with you to make sure I’m making progress and doing what you want?”
