# Taking Crap with Dignity ... and Style

## The Gentle Way

## The Sucker Punches of Life

The first step in learning to deal with verbal attacks is to **acknowledge that crap is being flung**. The second step is to **admit it is being flung at you**. Then **congratulate yourself**. It’s okay to be questioned, heckled, or even attacked. If **you are willing to take it**, you should be commended.

> That’s how ancient samurai warriors viewed their battles. They lived for them. They were trained to see warfare as a joy and conflict, as a sign that they were drawing more energy. The issue for them was not winning or losing—or even living or dying. **The issue was bravely engaging, fighting with great style, learning from the encounter. And because the warriors welcomed warfare, they were less likely to be tense while engaged in it, less likely to shut down and forget their training.**

The secret is simple: **It’s okay if someone insults, resists, or attacks you. Laugh it off. Show that it has no meaning, no sting. If you fight back and resist the affront, you give it life and credibility. If you defend yourself, you invite counterattack.**

Dozens teaches kids to handle verbal abuse. They learn looseness and agility in conversational play. The worst taunts imaginable, usually insults of each other’s mothers, are hurled back and forth. “Yo’ mama so stupid, she heard it was chilly outside, so she brought out a bowl!” “Oh yeah? Well, yo’ mama so old she was born before slavery!” Sometimes a shorthand version of Dozens is the simple insulting phrase, “Yo’ mama!”

What happens is that one player finally takes it personally and reacts in anger. He loses face and loses credibility. He also loses the game and is laughed at. By playing Dozens again and again, a black kid eventually catches on that an attack carries only the weight he allows it to. He learns that if he makes no big deal of even an insult to his mother there’s no incentive for anyone to keep insulting him. He has learned to effortlessly, eloquently, and effectively disarm the cocked tongue.
