# Elelven Things Never to Say to Anyone

#### 1. "Come Here!"

To you and me, “Come here!” is vaguely threatening. It says, “You haven’t obeyed me, so now I’m ordering you to move when I want you to move.”

I learned in police work that it’s much more effective to casually approach a person and say, “Excuse me, but I need to chat with you a second,” or even “Could I chat with you a second?” I gave the other party the feel ng that he had some choice, but my implication was clear. 

It’s best to control the location for such encounters. Samurai warriors cautioned their students to never let an opponent pick the fighting terrain. The reason was simple: Those who didn’t choose found themselves with the sun in their eyes and/or on loose ground.

#### 2. "You Wouldn't Understand."

I don’t know about you, but I find this phrase so insulting that I can almost hear the comma and then `stupid` implied at the end. No matter who this is said to, it puts the listener off. Better to say, “This might be difficult to understand, but  .  .  .” or “Let me try to explain this  .  .  .”

If you’re being pressed to reveal something you don’t want to reveal, avoid the convenient lie that the person wouldn’t understand. Just say, “I’d rather not answer that,” or the more emphatic, “I’m not willing to answer that.”

If someone brushes youoff with “You wouldn’t understand,” insist, “Yes I would. Try me. I want to help.”

#### 3. "Because Those Are The Rules."

You’re enforcing rules that exist for good reasons, don’t hesitate to explain them. Your audience might not agree, but at least they will have been honored with an answer.

If you fall back on “Because those are the rules,” you’ll be judged an insensitive, uncaring oaf. It will appear you are more concerned with your own authority than with the other person’s welfare. You may be told, “So what? The rules are wrong.”

#### 4. "It's None of Your Business."

he phrase angers people because it brands them as outsiders and brusquely cuts them off. It also exposes you as someone who doesn’t have a good reason for answering the question. It makes it seem that you have no power behind your position.

Rather than saying, “It’s none of your business,” explain why the information cannot be revealed. You can usually do this without revealing more than you want to. If it’s a confidential matter, say why. For instance, “The parties involved would not want me to say anything without their knowledge or permission, and I want to honor that—you understand.”

#### 5. "What Do You Want Me To Do About It?"

What a cop-out! The pseudo question, almost always accompanied by sarcasm, is seen as an evasion of responsibility. It’s also a sign that you’re exasperated. It’s often said by untrained sales clerks in response to complaints, but it’s also heard among friends, spouses, and co-workers at the ends of their ropes.

When you say “What do you want me to do about it?” you can count on two problems: the one you started with and the one you just created by appearing to duck responsibility.

Rather, offer to help sort out the problem and work toward a solution. If it truly is not in your area of responsibility, point the complainer to the right department or person. If you’re unable or unqualified to assist and you haven’t a clue how to help the person, nicely say so and apologize. You didn’t do anything wrong, but an apology almost always gains you an instant ally. No one wants you to feel bad for something that’s not your fault.

#### 6. "Calm Down!"

The command flat out doesn’t work. In fact, it almost always makes people more upset. If you’ve ever tried this on your friends or family, you know. “Calm down!” is criticism of people’s behavior and implies that they have no right to be upset. Rather than reassuring them that things will improve—which should be your goal—you have created a new problem. Not only is there the matter they were upset about to begin with, but now they need to defend their reaction to you.

Rather, put on a calm face and demeanor, look the person in the eye, touch him gently if appropriate, and say, “It’s going to be all right. Talk to me. What’s the trouble?”

If someone says “Calm down!” to you, say, “Look, I’m obviously not calm and there are reasons for it. Let’s talk about them.” That should open the door for that person to help, but if he doesn’t respond in a more meaningful way, further discussion is probably unwise. And if you’re not calm, it’s probably better to leave.

#### 7. "What's Your Problem?"

It signals that this is a “you versus me” battle rather than an “us” discussion. The typical reaction is defensive. “It’s not myproblem; you’rethe problem!”

The problem with the word problemis that it makes people feel deficient or even helpless. The word can transport them back to grade school when they felt misunderstood and underrated. Nobody likes to admit he has a problem. People prefer to think of solutions. “What’s your problem?” makes them feel as if they’ve already failed.

Rather, say, “What’s the matter? How can I help?” Then you can start a real discussion of the issue.

If someone is unenlightened enough to ask you“What’s your problem?” say, “It’s not a problem, it’s just something I need to discuss. Can we talk?”

#### 8. "You Never..." Or "You Always..."

These absolute generalizations are lies. Is it true that a childnevercleans up his room? (Okay, bad example. That may be true!) Is it true that your spouse is “always late”? Accusatory generalizations are rarely true and indicate hat you have both lost perspective andwill soon lose the attention of your listener.

Tell someone he never listens to you and he will either remind you of several times when he has or he will be tempted to spitefully prove you right and ignore you. You also make him angry and leave him feeling there is no way he can ever please you.

Better to turn the burden upon yourself and seek his help. “When you are late without calling, it makes me feel as if you don’t care about me or my schedule.” That should elicit an apology or at least an explanation. But if you jumped in with “You never call  .  .  .” you’re more likely to be reminded of the three times in the last month when he did call.

If someone uses such absolute phrasing to you, see if you can see his point. Say, “I know it seems I never help out, because often I don’t. But let’s talk about it. Is that the real issue or are you upset about something else?”

#### 9. "I'm Not Going to Say This Again."

This threat traps you, because if you’re really not going to repeat yourself, you’re left with one option: action. If you’re not prepared to act, you lose credibility.

If you areprepared to act, you have tipped off your adversary and he can plan to react to or subvert you. Better to not reveal all your options at once.

If you need to emphasize the seriousness of your words, say, “It’s important that you understand this, so let me say it again. And please listen carefully.”

If someone tells you“I’m not going to say it again,” just answer with sincerity, “Okay, I got it.”

#### 10. "I'm Doing This For Your Own Good."

That is guaranteed to turn any listener into an instant cynic. No one believes it. It begs the sarcastic comeback, “Oh yessssss. Sure, I bet.”

If what you are doing really isfor the other person’s benefit, show him that. Offer reasons. Give concrete examples of how his life will improve because of what you’re doing. Just as I encourage cops to tell perpetrators to surrender early so they don’t have to spend the night in jail, away from their own table and hot food and loved ones, there is a benefit that can be pointed to for anyone you're trying to encourage to do something - for his own good.

“I’m doing this for your own good,” ask for specifics. If what he says doesn’t match your notion of what constitutes your own good, say so. Remind the person, “No one knows me better than I do. I’m the best judge of what is for my own good, just as you’re the best judge of what is for your own good.”

#### 11. "Why Don't You Be Reasonable?"

Not once in my life has anyone come up to me and said, “You know what? I’m in left field today , totally irrational.” People may know they’re a little forgetful or flaky or out of it, but they’re not going to admit to being unreasonable. So you’re only inviting conflict with a question like this.

Instead, allow people to become more reasonable by being reasonable with them. Use the language of reassurance, saying things like “Let me see if I understand your position,” and then paraphrasing their own words. That not only assures you that you’re hearing them correctly, but it also enables them to see their own view as you see it. That approach starts to absorb people’s tension and makes them feel your support. Then you can help them think more logically and less destructively, without making the insulting charge implied in the question.

If someone asks you“Why don’t you be more reasonable?” force yourself to slow down. Take a deep breath and in a slow, thoughtful, nonthreatening voice, say, “I’m being as reasonable as I know how, and with any luck, I’ll get better. But apparently I see the issue differently than you do.”
