# The Greatest Speech You'll Ever Live to Regret

WHEN WE EMPLOY the words that most naturally come to our lips, we run the risk of giving the greatest speech we’ll ever live to regret. We wind up saying things we can never take back.

We all deal with people “under the influence” nearly everyday. If it’s not alcohol or drugs, it’s frustration, fear, impatience, lack of self-worth, defensiveness, and a host of other influences. Doesn’t it make sense that we should develop a state of mind that will allow us to skillfully interact with these people—whether they be criminals, customers, spouses, kids, or sales clerks—and not let them get our goats?

#### A Habit of Mind

A samurai warfare state of mind called mushinis defined as “the still center,” or the ability to stay calm, read your opponent, and attempt to redirect his aggression in a more positive way. If you cannot keep a still center, you cannot stay in control of yourself or the situation.

The mushinstate underlies both physical judo and Verbal Judo—a mind-mouth harmony, if you will. The English word closest to the idea of mushinis disinterested.

Many make the mistake of defining disinterestedas uninterested. In fact, disinterestedmeans impartial. Disis from the Latin root meaning “not” and interestedis from the Latin word meaning “biased.” So the word means “not biased, open, flexible.”

A closed mind misreads people and makes terrible errors. The flexible mind has the surviving strength of the willow tree, which survives even in heavy winds because it bends, it is malleable. This is precisely what we have to do and be when under the influence of verbal abuse.

Being malleable is always superior to that which is unmovable, thus the judo principle of controlling things by going along with them—mastery through adaptation. This allows you the strength to deal with people different from yourself.

I was never taught to deal with people who insulted me. I responded the natural, defensive way, which caused confrontation. I thought confrontation was the point. Now I know that a studied response of deflection and redirection is the answer. I discovered it in my study of ancient warfare. In an old samurai text, translated from the Japanese, an ancient master was quoted: “When man throws spear of insult at head, move head! Spear miss target, leave man empty-handed, spear in wall, not in you.”

#### Four Reasons to Employ Strip Phrases

When you react, you’re being controlled by the situation. When you respond, you’re dealing with it.

Second, deflectors serve as what I call a “springboard focus technique.” Strip phrases springboard you over all the insults that might otherwise allow the other person (a speeder, subordinate, angry child, complaining customer) to defeat you. Once you have avoided the hurled insult, you have springboarded to the wordbut, which brings me to Thompson’s Law of the Street, which can be applied everywhere: After the word but,use only words that serve your professional purpose.

“Understan’ that, sir, butI need to see your driver’s license.”

“I ’preciate that, butI need to see some identification.”

Everything after the butis designed to get the job done.

Third, if you can springboard past the insults and focus on the goal, you have disempowered the other person. Say you’re a clerk and someone comes into your store and blames you for a shirt that fell apart. He insults you, calls you incompetent, and questions your heritage. Your first reaction might naturally be “Hold on here! Don’t blame me! You’re not going to get any satisfaction if you take that tone!”

But notice, if you ignore the insult and springboard over it with an apology, an “I ’preciate that,” you have disempowered him. You’re winning! And you’re feeling good.

Fourth, when you use these tactical phrases, you sound good. It ’s not enough to begood. You’ve also got to sound good, or it’s no good. Because you lose credibility with anyone who overhears it. Springboarding allows you to sound good under pressure.

There are times when it is good notto use strip phrases. When you sense that the strip phrase might be a danger in itself, because the person is agitated that you’re clearly deflecting and not dealing with the conflict at hand, skip the strip phrases and deal with the issues immediately.

#### Two Principles for Dealing with Difficult People

Principle number one: Let the person say what he wants as long as he does what you say. I even tell cops that. I say, “Let them chip at you as long as they’re cooperating with you. What do you care what they say? Your attitude should be ‘Say what you want, but do as I say!’”

The only time this would not work is when the words the citizen uses serve only to inflate him with adrenaline, making him or his companions more of a problem. The officer has to carefully watch a person’s body language to see when he might explode from his own initiative. It’s important to intervene before these situations get out of hand.

In a business setting, remember that insulting people don’t mean what they’re saying anyway, so what do you care what they say? They are upset. Focus on their behavior, not on their attitude. As long as they are doing what you need them to do, let their mood blow over.

Principle number two: Always go for the win/win solution. I tell cops, “Look, you can give the citizen the last word because you have the last action.” Let the perpetrator talk all he wants. You have the authority and the power to arrest him if necessary.

If you both take away people’s last word andhave the last act, you create violent scenarios and make enemies. Let ’em spout off. They win, you win.
