# Chapter 1. Professionalism

> Professionalism is a loaded term. Certainly it is a badge of honor and pride, but
> it is also a marker of responsibility and accountability. The two go hand in
> hand, of course. You can’t take pride and honor in something that you can’t be
> held accountable for.



## Be Careful What You Ask For

What would happen if you allowed a bug to slip through a module, and it cost
your company 10,000 dollars ? The nonprofessional would shrug his shoulders, say “stuff happens,” and start writing the next module. The professional would write the company a check for 10,000 dollars

Yeah, it feels a little different when it’s your own money, doesn’t it? But that
feeling is the feeling a professional has all the time. Indeed, that feeling is the
essence of professionalism. Because, you see, professionalism is all about taking
responsibility



## Taking Responsibility

Upon reflection I realized that shipping without testing the routine had been irresponsible. The reason I neglected the test was so I could say I had shipped on time. It was about me saving face. I had not been concerned about the customer, nor about my employer. I had only been concerned about my own reputation. I should have taken responsibility early and told Tom that the tests weren’t complete and that I was not prepared to ship the software on time. That would have been hard, and Tom would have been upset. But no customers would have lost data, and no service managers would have called.



## First, Do No Harm

What harm can a software developer do? From a purely software point of view, he or she can do harm to both the function and structure of the software.

1. **Do No Harm To Function**
   
   > It is the lot of a professional to be accountable for errors even though errors are virtually certain. So, my aspiring professional, the first thing you must practice is apologizing. Apologies are necessary, but insufficient. You cannot simply keep making the same errors over and over. As you mature in your profession, your error rate should rapidly decrease towards the asymptote of zero. It won’t ever get to zero, but it is your responsibility to get as close as possible to it.

2. **QA Should Find Nothing**
   
   > Therefore, when you release your software you should expect QA to find no problems. It is unprofessional in the extreme to purposely send code that you know to be faulty to QA. And what code do you know to be faulty? Any code you aren’t certain about!

3. **You Must Know It Works**
   
   > How can you know your code works That’s easy. Test it. Test it again. Test it up. Test it down. Test it seven ways to Sunday
   > 
   > automate your tests. Write unit tests that you can execute on a moment’s notice, and run those tests as often as you can.

4. **Automated QA**
   
   > you as a developer need a relatively quick and reliable mechanism to know that the code you have written works and does not interfere with the rest of the system. So, at the very least, your automated tests should tell you that the system is very likely to pass QA

5. **Do No Harm To Structure**
   
   > The fundamental assumption underlying all software projects is that software is easy to change. If you violate this assumption by creating inflexible structures, then you undercut the economic model that the entire industry is based on

## 

## Work Ethic

Your career is your responsibility. It is not your employer’s responsibility to make sure you are marketable. It is not your employer’s responsibility to train you, or to send you to conferences, or to buy you books. These things are your responsibility. Woe to the software developer who entrusts his career to his employer.

You should plan on working 60 hours per week. The first 40 are for your employer. The remaining 20 are for you. During this remaining 20 hours you should be reading, practicing, learning, and otherwise enhancing your career.

Perhaps you think this is a recipe for burnout. On the contrary, it is a recipe to avoid burnout. Presumably you became a software developer because you are passionate about software and your desire to be a professional is motivated by that passion. During that 20 hours you should be doing those things that reinforce that passion. Those 20 hours should be fun!

## Know Your Field

A wealth of ideas, disciplines, techniques, tools, and terminologies decorate the last fifty years of our field. How much of this do you know? If you want to be a professional, you should know a sizable chunk of it and constantly be increasing the size of that chunk.

Here is a minimal list of the things that every software professional should be conversant with:

- **Design Patterns** -> You ough to be able to describe all 24 patterns in the GOF book and have a working knowledge of many of the patterns in the POSA books.

- **Design Principles** -> You should know the SOLID principles and have a good understanding of the component principles.

- **Methods** -> You should understand XP, Scrum, Lean, Kanban, Waterfall, Structured Analysis, and Structured Design.

- **Dicipline** -> You should practice TDD, Object-Oriented design, Structured Programming, Continous Integration, and Pair Programming.

- **Artifacts** -> You should know how to use: UML, DFDs, Structure Charts, Petri Nets, State Translation Diagrams and Tables, flow charts, and decisions tables.

## Continous Learning

## Practice

Doing your daily job is performance, not practice. Practice is when you specifically exercise your skills outside of the performance of your job for the sole purpose of refining and enhancing those skills.

One technique I use frequently is the repetition of simple exercises such as the Bowling Game or Prime Factors. I call these exercises kata. There are many such kata to choose from.

A kata usually comes in the form of a simple programming problem to solve, such as writing the function that calculates the prime factors of an integer. The point of doing the kata is not to figure out how to solve the problem; you know how to do that already. The point of the kata is to train your fingers and your brain.

## Collaboration

The second best way to learn is to collaborate with other people. Professional software developers make a special effort to program together, practice together, design and plan together. By doing so they learn a lot from each other, and they get more done faster with fewer errors

## Mentoring

The best way to learn is to teach. Nothing will drive facts and values into your head faster and harder than having to communicate them to people you are responsible for

## Know Your Domain

It is the responsibility of every software professional to understand the domain of the solutions they are programming. If you are writing an accounting system, you should know the accounting field. If you are writing a travel application, you should know the travel industry. You don’t have to be a domain expert, but there is a reasonable amount of due diligence that you ought to engage in.

When starting a project in a new domain, read a book or two on the topic. Interview your customer and users about the foundation and basics of the domain. Spend some time with the experts, and try to understand their principles and values.

## Identify With Your Employer/Customer

Your employer’s problems are your problems. You need to understand what those problems are and work toward the best solutions. As you develop a system you need to put yourself in your employer’s shoes and make sure that the features you are developing are really going to address your employer’s needs

## Humility

Programming is an act of creation. When we write code we are creating something out of nothing. We are boldly imposing order upon chaos. We are confidently commanding, in precise detail, the behaviors of a machine that could otherwise do incalculable damage. And so, programming is an act of supreme arrogance

However, a professional also knows that there will be times when he will fail, his risk calculations will be wrong, his abilities will fall short; he’ll look in the mirror and see an arrogant fool smiling back at him.

So when a professional finds himself the butt of a joke, he’ll be the first to laugh. He will never ridicule others, but will accept ridicule when it is deserved and laugh it off when it’s not. He will not demean another for making a mistake, because he knows he may be the next to fail.
