# Chapter 12. Collaboration

Most software is created by teams. Teams are most effective when the team members collaborate professionally. It is unprofessional to be a loner or a recluse on a team.



## Programmers vs People

We didn’t become programmers because we like working with people. As a rule we find interpersonal relationships messy and unpredictable. We like the clean and predictable behavior of the machines that we program. We are happiest when we are alone in a room for hours deeply focussing on some really interesting problem.

OK, that’s a huge overgeneralization and there are loads of exceptions. There are plenty of programmers who are good at working with people and enjoy the challenge. But the group average still tends in the direction I stated. We, programmers, enjoy the mild sensory deprivation and cocoonlike immersion of focus.

### Programmers versus Employers

The first responsibility of the professional programmer is to meet the needs of his or her employer. That means collaborating with your managers, business analysts, testers, and other team members to deeply understand the business goals. This doesn’t mean you have to become a business wonk. It does mean that you need to understand why you are writing the code you are writing, and how the business that employs you will benefit from it.

The worst thing a professional programmer can do is to blissfully bury himself in a tomb of technology while the business crashes and burns around him. Your job is to keep the business afloat!

### Programmers versus Programmers

Programmers often have difficulty working closely with other programmers. This leads to some really terrible problems.

#### Owned Code

One of the worst symptoms of a dysfunctional team is when each programmer builds a wall around his code and refuses to let other programmers touch it. I have been to places where the programmers wouldn’t even let other programmers see their code. This is a recipe for disaster.

This was a disaster for the technology. As a consultant I was able to see that there was massive duplication in the code and that the interfaces between the modules were completely skewed. But no amount of argument on my part could convince the programmers (or the business) to change their ways. After all, their salary reviews were tied to the importance of the devices they maintained.

#### Collective Ownership

It is far better to break down all walls of code ownership and have the team own all the code. I prefer teams in which any team member can check out any module and make any changes they think are appropriate. I want the team to own the code, not the individuals.

Professional developers do not prevent others from working in the code. They do not build walls of ownership around code. Rather, they work with each other on as much of the system as they can. They learn from each other by working with each other on other parts of the system.

#### Pairing

Many programmers dislike the idea of pair-programming. I find this odd since most programmers will pair in emergencies. Why? Because it is clearly the most efficient way to solve the problem. It just goes back to the old adage: Two heads are better than one. But if pairing is the most efficient way to solve a problem in an emergency, why isn’t it the most efficient way to solve a problem period?

Professionals also pair because it is the best way to share knowledge with each other. Professionals don’t create knowledge silos. Rather, they learn the different parts of the system and business by pairing with each other. They recognize that although all team members have a position to play, all team members should also be able play another position in a pinch.

Professionals pair because it is the best way to review code. No system should consist of code that hasn’t been reviewed by other programmers. There are many ways to conduct code reviews; most of them are horrifically inefficient. The most efficient and effective way to review code is to collaborate in writing it.



## Cerebellums

I rode the train into Chicago one morning in 2000 during the height of the dot com boom. As I stepped off the train onto the platform I was assaulted by a huge billboard hanging above the exit doors. The sign was for a well-known software firm that was recruiting programmers. It read: Come rub cerebellums with the best.

But something else intrigued me about that sign. It made me think of a group of people trying to rub cerebellums. Since the cerebellum is at the back of the brain, the best way to rub cerebellums is to face away from each other. I imagined a team of programmers in cubicles, sitting in corners with their backs to each other, staring at screens while wearing headphones. That’s how you rub cerebellums. That’s also not a team.

Professionals work together. You can’t work together while you are sitting in corners wearing headphones. So I want you sitting around tables facing each other. I want you to be able to smell each other’s fear. I want you to be able to overhear someone’s frustrated mutterings. I want serendipitous communication, both verbal and body language. I want you communicating as a unit.

There are times when working alone is the right thing to do. There are times when you simply need to think long and hard about a problem. There are times when the task is so trivial that it would be a waste to have another person working with you. But, in general, it is best to collaborate closely with others and to pair with them a large fraction of the time.

## Conclusion

Perhaps we didn’t get into programming to work with people. Tough luck for us. Programming is all about working with people. We need to work with our business, and we need to work with each other.

I know, I know. Wouldn’t it be great if they just shut us into a room with six massive screens, a T3 pipe, a parallel array of superfast processors, unlimited ram and disk, and a never-ending supply of diet cola and spicy corn chips? Alas, it is not to be. If we really want to spend our days programming, we are going to have to learn to talk to—people.
