# Chapter 14. Mentoring, Apprenticeship, and Craftsmanship

I have been consistently disappointed by the quality of CS graduates. It’s not that the graduates aren’t bright or talented, it’s just that they haven’t been taught what programming is really all about.



## Degrees of Failure

And there’s another problem. Even the best CS degree programs do not typically prepare the young graduate for what they will find in industry. This is not an indictment of the degree programs so much as it is the reality of nearly all disciplines. What you learn in school and what you find on the job are often very different things.



## Mentoring

### Digi-Comp I, My First Computer

Do you remember the moment your first program worked? Did it change your life or set you on a course you could not turn away from?

I did not figure it all out for myself. I was mentored. Some very kind and very adept people (to whom I owe a huge debt of gratitude) took the time to write a treatise on boolean algebra that was accessible to a twelve year old. They connected the mathematical theory to the pragmatics of the little plastic computer and empowered me to make that computer do what I wanted it to do.

I just pulled down my copy of that fateful manual. I keep it in a zip-lock bag. Nevertheless, the years have taken their toll by yellowing the pages and making them brittle. Still, the power of the words shines out of them. The elegance of their description of boolean algebra consumed three sparse pages. Their stepby-step walk-through of the equations for each of the original programs is still compelling. It was a work of mastery. It was a work that changed at least one young man’s life. Yet I doubt I’ll never know the names of the authors.

### The ECP-18 in High School

I remember at one point sitting in the math lab watching one of the teachers struggle to get a program working. He was trying to type two numbers in decimal on the attached teletype, and then print out the sum. Anyone who has tried to write a program like this in machine language on a mini-computer knows that it is far from trivial. You have to read in the characters, convert them to digits, then to binary, add them, convert back to decimal and encode back into characters. And, believe me, it’s a lot worse when you are entering the program in binary through the front panel!

I had no idea what his algorithm was. That kind of programming was still magic to me. And he never spoke to me while I watched over his shoulder. Indeed, nobody talked to me about this computer. I think they considered me a nuisance to be ignored, fluttering around the math lab like a moth. Suffice it to say that neither the student nor the teachers had developed a high degree of social skill.

This was mentoring. Certainly it was not the kind of mentoring I could have hoped for. It would have been nice if one of those teachers had taken me under his wing and worked with me. But it didn’t matter, because I was observing them and learning at a furious pace.

### Unconventional Mentoring

I told you those two stories because they describe two very different kinds of mentoring, neither of which are the kind that the word usually implies. 

In the first case I learned from the authors of a very well-written manual. 

In the second case I learned by observing people who were actively trying to ignore me. In both cases the knowledge gained was profound and foundational.

But, frankly, that’s about it. There just weren’t that many senior programmers in the early seventies. Everywhere else I worked, I was senior. There was nobody to help me figure out what true professional programming was. There was no role model who taught me how to behave or what to value. Those things I had to learn for myself, and it was by no means easy.

### Hard Knocks

As I told you before, I did, in fact, get fired from that factory automation job in 1976. Although I was technically very competent, I had not learned to pay attention to the business or the business goals. Dates and deadlines meant nothing to me. I forgot about a big Monday morning demo, left the system broken on Friday, and showed up late on Monday with everyone staring angrily at me.

In the end, I survived and prospered. But there has to be a better way. It would have been far better for me if I’d had a true mentor, someone to teach me the in’s and out’s. Someone I could have observed while I helped him with small tasks, and who would review and guide my early work. Someone to act as a role model and teach me appropriate values and reflexes. A sensei. A master. A mentor.



## Apprenticeship

What do doctors do? Do you think hospitals hire medical graduates and throw them into operating rooms to do heart surgery on their first day on the job? Of course not.

Upon graduation, and before they can be licensed, the newly minted doctors are required to spend a year in supervised practice and training called internship. This is intense on-the-job training. The intern is surrounded by role models and teachers.

Once internship has been completed each of the medical specialties requires three to five more years of further supervised practice and training known as residency. The resident gains confidence by taking on ever greater responsibilities while still being surrounded by, and supervised by, senior doctors.

This description of the medical profession was somewhat idealized, and probably wildly inaccurate. But the fact remains that when the stakes are high, we do not send graduates into a room, throw meat in occasionally, and expect good things to come out. So why do we do this in software?

Given that we entrust software developers with all aspects of our lives, from the minutia to the momentous, I suggest that a reasonable period of training and supervised practice is not inappropriate.

### Software Apprenticeship

So how should the software profession induct young graduates into the ranks of professionalism? What steps should they follow? What challenges should they meet? What goals should they achieve? Let’s work it backwards.

#### Masters

These are programmers who have taken the lead on more than one significant software project. Typically they will have 10+ years of experience and will have worked on several different kinds of systems, languages, and operating systems. They know how to lead and coordinate multiple teams, are proficient designers and architects, and can code circles around everyone else without breaking a sweat. They have been offered management positions, but have either turned them down, have fled back after accepting them, or have integrated them with their primarily technical role.

They maintain that technical role by reading, studying, practicing, doing, and teaching. It is to a master that the company will assign technical responsibility for a project. Think, “Scotty.”

#### Journeymen

These are programmers who are trained, competent, and energetic. During this period of their career they will learn to work well in a team and to become team leaders. They are knowledgeable about current technology but typically lack experience with many diverse systems. They tend to know one language, one system, one platform; but they are learning more. Experience levels vary widely among their ranks, but the average is about five years. On the far side of that average we have burgeoning masters; on the near side we have recent apprentices.

Journeymen are supervised by masters, or other more senior journeymen. Young journeymen are seldom allowed autonomy. Their work is closely supervised. Their code is scrutinized. As they gain in experience, autonomy grows. Supervision becomes less direct and more nuanced. Eventually it transitions into peer review.

#### Apprentices/Interns

Graduates start their careers as apprentices. Apprentices have no autonomy. They are very closely supervised by journeymen. **At first they take no tasks at all, they simply provide assistance to the journeymen. This should be a time of very intense pair-programming. This is when disciplines are learned and reinforced. This is when the foundation of values is created.**

> Journeymen are the teachers. They make sure that the apprentices know design principles, design patterns, disciplines, and rituals. Journeymen teach TDD, refactoring, estimation, and so forth. They assign reading, exercises, and practices to the apprentices; they review their progress.

Apprenticeship ought to last a year. By that time, if the journeymen are willing to accept the apprentice into their ranks, they will make a recommendation to the masters. The masters should examine the apprentice both by interview and by reviewing their accomplishments. If the masters agree, then the apprentice becomes a journeyman.

### The Reality

Again, all of this is idealized and hypothetical. However, if you change the names and squint at the words you’ll realize that it’s not all that different from the way we expect things to work now. Graduates are supervised by young teamleads, who are supervised by project-leads, and so on. The problem is that, in most cases, this supervision is not technical! In most companies there is no technical supervision at all. Programmers get raises and eventual promotions because, well, that’s just what you do with programmers.



## Craftmanship

So now we are in a position to define this word: craftsmanship. Just what is it? To understand, let’s look at the word craftsman. This word brings to mind skill and quality. It evokes experience and competence. **A craftsman is someone who works quickly, but without rushing, who provides reasonable estimates and meets commitments. A craftsman knows when to say no, but tries hard to say yes. A craftsman is a professional.**

Craftsmanship is the mindset held by craftsmen. Craftsmanship is a meme that contains values, disciplines, techniques, attitudes, and answers.

The craftsmanship meme is handed from one person to another. It is taught by elders to the young. It is exchanged between peers. It is observed and relearned, as elders observe the young. Craftsmanship is a contagion, a kind of mental virus. You catch it by observing others and allowing the meme to take hold.

### Convincing People

You can’t convince people to be craftsmen. You can’t convince them to accept the craftsmanship meme. Arguments are ineffective. Data is inconsequential. Case studies mean nothing. The acceptance of a meme is not so much a rational decision as an emotional one. This is a very human thing.

So how do you get people to adopt the craftsmanship meme? Remember that a meme is contagious, but only if it can be observed. **So you make the meme observable. You act as a role model. You become a craftsman first, and let your craftsmanship show. Then just let the meme do the rest of the work.**



## Conclusion

School can teach the theory of computer programming. But school does not, and cannot teach the discipline, practice, and skill of being a craftsman. Those things are acquired through years of personal tutelage and mentoring. It is time for those of us in the software industry to face the fact that guiding the next batch of software developers to maturity will fall to us, not to the universities. It’s time for us to adopt a program of apprenticeship, internship, and long-term guidance.
