# Chapter 3. Saying Yes

 

## A Language of Commitment

> **Say. Mean. Do**
> 
> 3 parts to making a commitment:
> 
> - You *say* you'll do it.
> 
> - You *mean* it.
> 
> - You *actually do it*.

There are very few people who, when they say something, they mean it and then actually get it done. There are some who will say things and mean them, but they never get it done. And there are far more people who promise things and don’t even mean to do them. Ever heard someone say, “Man, I really need to lose some weight,” and you knew they are not going to do anything about it? It happens all the time.

Instead of trusting our guts, we can use some language-related tricks to try and figure out if people really mean what they say. And by changing what we say, we can start taking care of steps 1 and 2 of the previous list on our own. When we say we will commit to something, and we need to mean it.

### Recognizing Lack of Commitment

We should look at the language we use when we commit to doing something, as the telltale sign of things to come. Actually, it’s more a matter of looking for specific words in what we say. If you can’t find those little magic words, chances are we don’t mean what we say, or we may not believe it to be feasible.

> Here are some examples of words and phrases to look for that are telltale signs 
> of noncommitment:
> 
> - **Need/should.** => "We need to get this done." "I need to lose weight." "Someone should make that happen."
> 
> - **Hope/wish.** => "I hope to get this done by tomorrow." "I hope we can meet again some day." "I wish I had time for that." "I wish this computer was faster."
> 
> - **Let's.** => (not followed by "I . . .") "Let's meet sometime." "Let's finish this thing."

You’ll find we tend to be very busy not taking responsibility for things.

### What Does Commitment Sound Like?

The secret ingredient to recognizing real commitment is to look for sentences that sound like this: I will . . . by . . . (example: I will finish this by Tuesday.)

> What’s important about this sentence?
> 
> **You’re stating a fact about something YOU will do with a clear end time.**
> 
> You’re not talking about anyone else but yourself. You’re talking about an action that you will take. You won’t “possibly” take it, or “might get to it”; you will achieve it

There is (technically) no way out of this verbal commitment. You said you’ll do it and now only a binary result is possible—you either get it done, or you don’t. If you don’t get it done, people can hold you up to your promises. You will feel bad about not doing it. You will feel awkward telling someone about not having done it (if that someone heard you promise you will).

You’ve changed the language you use to a language of commitment, and that will help you get through the next two stages: meaning it, and following through.

Here are a number of reasons you might not mean it, or follow through, with some solutions.

> ###### It wouldn’t work because I rely on person X to get this done.
> 
> **You can only commit to things that you have full control of.**
> 
> For example, if your goal is to finish a module that also depends on another team, you can’t commit to finish the module with full integration with the other team. But you can commit to specific actions that will bring you to your target. You could:
> 
> - Sit down for an hour with Gary from the infrastructure team to understand your dependencies.
> 
> - Create an interface that abstracts your module’s dependency from the other team’s infrastructure.
> 
> - Meet at least three times this week with the build guy to make sure your changes work well in the company’s build system.
> 
> - Create your own personal build that runs your integration tests for the module.
> 
> **If the end goal depends on someone else, you should commit to specific actions that bring you closer to the end goal**

> ###### It wouldn’t work because I don’t really know if it can be done.
> 
> **If it can’t be done, you can still commit to actions that will bring you closer 
> to the target. Finding out if it can be done can be one of the actions to 
> commit to!**
> 
> Instead of committing to fix all 25 remaining bugs before the release (which may not be possible), you can commit tothese specific actions that bring you closer to that goal:
> 
> - Go through all 25 bugs and try to recreate them.
> 
> - Sit down with the QA who found each bug to see a repro of that bug.
> 
> - Spend all the time you have this week trying to fix each bug.

> ###### It wouldn’t work because sometimes I just won’t make it.
> 
> That happens. Something unexpected might happen, and that’s life. But you still want to live up to expectations. In that case, it’s time to change the expectations, as soon as possible.
> 
> **If you can’t make your commitment, the most important thing is to raise a red flag as soon as possible to whoever you committed to.**
> 
> By doing this, your commitment can still be fulfilled, or you can change to a different commitment.
> 
> some example:
> 
> - If you set a meeting for noon at a cafe downtown with a colleague and you get stuck in traffic, you doubt you’ll be able to follow through on your commitment to be there on time. You can call your colleague as soon as you realize you might be late, and let them know. Maybe you can find a closer place to meet, or perhaps postpone the meeting.
> 
> - If you committed to solving a bug you thought was solvable and you realize at some point the bug is much more hideous than previously thought, you can raise the flag. The team can then decide on a course of action to make that commitment (pairing, spiking on potential solutions, brainstorming) or change the priority and move you over to another simpler bug.
> 
> **One important point here is: If you don’t tell anyone about the potential problem as soon as possible, you’re not giving anyone a chance to help you follow through on your commitment.**

## 

## Learning How to Say "Yes"

### The Other Side of "Try"

Let’s imagine that Peter is responsible for some modifications to the rating engine. He’s privately estimated that these modifications will take him five or six days. He also thinks that writing the documentation for the modifications will take a few hours. On Monday morning his manager, Marge, asks him for status.

```
Marge: “Peter, will you have the rating engine mods done by Friday?”
Peter: “I think that’s doable.”
Marge: “Will that include the documentation?”
Peter: “I’ll try to get that done as well.”
```

**Notice the abuse of the word try. In the last chapter we used the “extra effort” 
definition of try. Here, Peter is using the “maybe, maybe not” definition.**

Peter would be better off responding like this:

```
Marge: “Peter, will you have the rating engine mods done by Friday?”
Peter: “Probably, but it might be Monday.”
Marge: “Will that include the documentation?”
Peter: “The documentation will take me another few hours, so Monday  is possible, but it might be as late as Tuesday.”
```

## Committing with Discipline

This is a perfectly fair question for Marge to ask. She’s got a schedule to maintain, and she needs a binary answer about Friday. How should Peter respond?

Peter might be tempted to break discipline at this point. He might be able to get done faster if he doesn’t write his tests. He might be able to get done faster if he doesn’t refactor. He might be able to get done faster if he doesn’t run the full regression suite.

> This is where the professional draws the line. First of all, Peter is just wrong about his suppositions. He won’t get done faster if he doesn’t write his tests. He won’t get done faster if he doesn’t refactor. He won’t get done faster if he omits the full regression suite. Years of experience have taught us that breaking disciplines only slows us down.
> 
> But secondly, as a professional he has a responsibility to maintain certain standards. His code needs to be tested, and needs to have tests. His code needs to be clean. And he has to be sure he hasn’t broken anything else in the system.

In this case Marge accepted Peter’s answer and started hunting for other options. But what if all Marge’s options have been exhausted? What if Peter were the last hope?

So now Peter starts to think about working some significant overtime, and probably most of the weekend. He needs to be very honest with himself about his stamina and reserves. It’s easy to say you’ll get a lot done on the weekends, it’s a lot harder to actually muster enough energy to do high-quality work.

> **Professionals know their limits. They know how much overtime they can effectively apply, and they know what the cost will be.**

In this case Peter feels pretty confident that a few extra hours during the week and some time on the weekend will be sufficient.

```
Peter: “OK, Marge, I’ll tell you what. I’ll call home and clear some overtime with my family. If they are OK with it, then I’ll get this task done by Monday morning.
I’ll even come in on Monday morning to make sure everything goes smoothly with Willy. But  then I’ll go home and won’t be back until Wednesday. Deal?”
```



### Conclusion

> Professionals are not required to say yes to everything that is asked of them. However, they should work hard to find creative ways to make “yes” possible. When professionals say yes, they use the language of commitment so that there is no doubt about what they’ve promised
