# Chapter 5. Test Driven Development

It has been over ten years since Test Driven Development (TDD) made its debut in the industry. It came in as part of the Extreme Programming (XP) wave, but has since been adopted by Scrum, and virtually all of the other Agile methods. Even non-Agile teams practice TDD.

## 

## The Jury Is In

Since those days I’ve learned that TDD is much more than a simple trick to shorten my cycle time. The discipline has a whole repertoire of benefits that I’ll describe in the following paragraphs.

But first I need to say this:

- The jury is in!

- The controversy is over.

- GOTO is harmful.

- And TDD works.

Yes, there have been lots of controversial blogs and articles written about TDD over the years and there still are. In the early days they were serious attempts at critique and understanding. Nowadays, however, they are just rants. The bottom line is that TDD works, and everybody needs to get over it

How can you consider yourself to be a professional if you do not know that all your code works? How can you know all your code works if you don’t test it every time you make a change? How can you test it every time you make a change if you don’t have automated unit tests with very high coverage? How can you get automated unit tests with very high coverage without practicing TDD?

## 

## The Three Laws of TDD

1. You are not allowed to write any production code until you have first written a failing unit test.

2. You are not allowed to write more of a unit test than is sufficient to fail -- and not compiling is failing.

3. You are not allowed to write more production code that is sufficient to pass the currently failing unit test.

These three laws lock you into a cycle that is, perhaps, thirty seconds long. You begin by writing a small portion of a unit test. But within a few seconds you must mention the name of some class or function you have not written yet, thereby causing the unit test to fail to compile. So you must write production code that makes the test compile. But you can’t write any more than that, so you start writing more unit test code.

Round and round the cycle you go. Adding a bit to the test code. Adding a bit to the production code. The two code streams grow simultaneously into complementary components. The tests fit the production code like an antibody fits an antigen

### The Litany of Benefits

#### Certainty

If you adopt TDD as a professional discipline, then you will write dozens of tests every day, hundreds of tests every week, and thousands of tests every year. And you will keep all those tests on hand and run them any time you make any changes to the code.

#### Defect Injection Rate

Now, FitNesse is not a mission-critical application. If there’s a bug, nobody dies, and nobody loses millions of dollars. So I can afford to ship based on nothing but passing tests.

#### Courage

But what if you could be sure that your cleaning did not break anything? What if you had the kind of certainty that I just mentioned? What if you could click a button and know within 90 seconds that your changes had broken nothing, and had only done good?

This is one of the most powerful benefits of TDD. When you have a suite of tests that you trust, then you lose all fear of making changes. When you see bad code, you simply clean it on the spot. The code becomes clay that you can safely sculpt into simple and pleasing structures.

#### Documentation

But what if you could be sure that your cleaning did not break anything? What if you had the kind of certainty that I just mentioned? What if you could click a button and know within 90 seconds that your changes had broken nothing, and had only done good? This is one of the most powerful benefits of TDD. When you have a suite of tests that you trust, then you lose all fear of making changes. When you see bad code, you simply clean it on the spot. The code becomes clay that you can safely sculpt into simple and pleasing structures.

The unit tests are documents. They describe the lowest-level design of the system. They are unambiguous, accurate, written in a language that the audience understands, and are so formal that they execute. They are the best kind of low-level documentation that can exist.

#### Design

The problem with testing code is that you have to isolate that code. It is often difficult to test a function if that function calls other functions. To write that test you’ve got to figure out some way to decouple the function from all the others. In other words, the need to test first forces you to think about good design.

If you don’t write your tests first, there is no force preventing you from coupling the functions together into an untestable mass. If you write your tests later, you may be able to test the inputs and the outputs of the total mass, but it will probably be quite difficult to test the individual functions.

“But I can write my tests later,” you say. No, you can’t. Not really. Oh, you can write some tests later. You can even approach high coverage later if you are careful to measure it. But the tests you write after the fact are defense. The tests you write first are offense. After-the-fact tests are written by someone who is already vested in the code and already knows how the problem was solved. There’s just no way those tests can be anywhere near as incisive as tests written first.

#### The Professional Option

## 

## What TDD Is Not

For all its good points, TDD is not a religion or a magic formula. Following the three laws does not guarantee any of these benefits. You can still write bad code even if you write your tests first. Indeed, you can write bad tests.

By the same token, there are times when following the three laws is simply impractical or inappropriate. These situations are rare, but they exist. No professional developer should ever follow a discipline when that discipline does more harm than good.
