# Chapter 5. Practicing

## 

## Some Background on Practice

```java
main()
{
 printf("hello, world\n");
}
```

Who among us has not written that program in one form or another? We use it as a way to prove a new environment or a new language. Writing and executing that program is proof that we can write and execute any program.

Although these little programs were certainly practice programs, programmers in general did not practice. Frankly, the thought never occurred to us. 
We were too busy writing code to think about practicing our skills. And besides, what would have been the point? During those years programming did not require quick reactions or nimble fingers. We did not use screen editors until the late ’70s. We spent much of our time waiting for compiles or debugging long, horrid stretches of code. We had not yet invented the short-cycles of TDD, so we did not require the fine tuning that practice could bring.

### Twenty-Two Zeros

But things have changed since the early days of programming. Some things have changed a lot. Other things haven’t changed much at all.

Oh, I’ve got better tools to write those statements with. And I have better languages to write those statements with. But the nature of the statements hasn’t changed in all that time. Code in 2010 would be recognizable to a programmer from the 1960s. The clay that we manipulate has not changed much in those four decades.

### Turnaround Time

But the way we work has changed dramatically. In the ’60s I could wait a day or two to see the results of a compile. In the late ’70s a 50,000-line program might take 45 minutes to compile. Even in the ’90s, long build times were the norm.

Programmers today don’t wait for compiles. Programmers today have such immense power under their fingers that they can spin around the red-greenrefactor loop in seconds.

> Doing anything quickly requires practice. Spinning around the code/test loop quickly requires you to make very quick decisions. Making decisions quickly means being able to recognize a vast number of situations and problems and simply know what to do to address them.
> 
> Consider two martial artists in combat. Each must recognize what the other is attempting and respond appropriately within milliseconds. In a combat situation you don’t have the luxury of freezing time, studying the positions, and deliberating on the appropriate response. In a combat situation you simply have to react. Indeed, it is your body that reacts while your mind is working on a higher-level strategy.

## 

## The Coding Dojo

Since then many programmers have adopted a martial arts metaphor for their practice sessions. The name Coding Dojo seems to have stuck. Sometimes a group of programmers will meet and practice together just like martial artists do. At other times, programmers will practice solo, again as martial artists do.

### Kata

In martial arts, a kata is a precise set of choreographed movements that simulates one side of a combat. The goal, which is asymptotically approached, is perfection. The artist strives to teach his body to make each movement perfectly and to assemble those movements into fluid enactment. Well-executed kata are beautiful to watch.

Beautiful though they are, the purpose of learning a kata is not to perform it on stage. **The purpose is to train your mind and body how to react in a particular combat situation. The goal is to make the perfected movements automatic and instinctive so that they are there when you need them.**

A programming kata is a precise set of choreographed keystrokes and mouse movements that simulates the solving of some programming problem. You aren’t actually solving the problem because you already know the solution. Rather, you are practicing the movements and decisions involved in solving the problem.

Like any martial artist, a programmer should know several different kata and practice them regularly so that they don’t fade away from memory. Many kata are recorded at http://katas.softwarecraftsmanship.org. Others can be found at http://codekata.pragprog.com.

### Wasa

When I studied jujitsu, much of our time in the dojo was spent in pairs practicing our wasa. Wasa is very much like a two-man kata. The routines are precisely memorized and played back. One partner plays the role of the aggressor, and the other partner is the defender. The motions are repeated over and over again as the practitioners swap roles.

Programmers can practice in a similar fashion using a game known as pingpong. The two partners choose a kata, or a simple problem. One programmer writes a unit test, and then the other must make it pass. Then they reverse roles.

### Randori

Randori is free-form combat. In our jujitsu dojo, we would set up a variety of combat scenarios and then enact them. Sometimes one person was told to defend, while each of the rest of us would attack him in sequence. Sometimes we would set two or more attackers against a single defender (usually the sensei, who almost always won). Sometimes we’d do two on two, and so forth.

Simulated combat does not map well to programming; however, there is a game that is played at many coding dojos called randori. It is very much like two-man wasa in which the partners are solving a problem. However, it is played with many people and the rules have a twist. With the screen projected on the wall, one person writes a test and then sits down. The next person makes the test pass and then writes the next test. This can be done in sequence around the table, or people can simply line up as they feel so moved. In either case these exercises can be a lot of fun.

These insights can only serve to broaden your own approach and improve your skill.

## 

## Broadening Your Experience

Professional programmers often suffer from a lack of diversity in the kinds of problems that they solve. Employers often enforce a single language, platform, and domain in which their programmers must work. Without a broadening influence, this can lead to a very unhealthy narrowing of your resume and your mindset. It is not uncommon for such programmers to find themselves unprepared for the changes that periodically sweep the industry.

### Open Source

One way to stay ahead of the curve is to do what lawyers and doctors do: Take on some pro-bono work by contributing to an open source project. There are lots of them out there, and there is probably no better way to increase your repertoire of skills than to actually work on something that someone else cares about.

### Practice Ethics

Professional programmers practice on their own time. It is not your employer’s job to help you keep your skills sharp for you. It is not your employer’s job to help you keep your resume tuned. Patients do not pay doctors to practice sutures.

Since your practice time is your own time, you don’t have to use the same languages or platforms that you use with your employer. Pick any language you like and keep your polyglot skills sharp. If you work in a .NET shop, practice a little Java or Ruby at lunch, or at home.

> In one way or another, all professionals practice. They do this because they care about doing the best job they possibly can. What’s more, they practice on  their own time because they realize that it is their responsibility—and not their employer’s—to keep their skills sharp. Practicing is what you do when you aren’t getting paid. You do it so that you will be paid, and paid well.



## Conclusion

In one way or another, all professionals practice. They do this because they care about doing the best job they possibly can. What’s more, they practice on their own time because they realize that it is their responsibility—and not their employer’s—to keep their skills sharp. Practicing is what you do when you aren’t getting paid. You do it so that you will be paid, and paid well.
