# Chapter 1: Of Course You Can Speed Read!

## What is Speed Reading, Anyway ?

Reading engages the eyes, ears, mouth, and, of course, the brain.

###### Speed reading is seeing

Prior to 1920 or so, researchers and educators believed that people read one word at a time. To read, they thought, you moved your eyes left to right across the page, taking in one word after the other. Under this theory, fast readers were people who could identify and recognize the words faster.

However, all but beginning readers have the ability to see and read more than one word at a time. As you move your eyes left to right across the page, you jump ahead in fits and starts, taking in anywhere between one and five words at a time in quick glances.

These quick glances, when your eyes stop moving at different 
points in a sentence as you read it, are called **eye fixations**.

> - **You read several words in a single glance.** Unless you’re encountering words you don’t know or haven’t read before, you don’t read words one at a time.
> 
> - **You expand your vision so that you can read and understand many words in a single glance.** A very good speed reader can read, see, and process 10 to 14 words in a single eye fixation
> 
> - **You expand your vision to read vertically as well as horizontally on the page.** As well as taking in more than one word on a line of text, speed readers can also, in a single glance, read and understand words on two or three different lines.

###### Speed reading is silent reading

When you read, do you sometimes hear a faint whispering in your ear that belongs not to you, but to another person? When you read, you speak words to yourself because you learned to read with the **sound-it-out method**.

> - Vocalizing is a throwback to your early reading education;  you must abandon it to be a speed reader.
> 
> - Training yourself not to vocalize when you read is one of the most important speed-reading skills you can acquire.

###### Speed reading is decoding the words

When you come across a word in your reading that you don’t know or recognize, you have to decode it. You break it into syllables, try to pronounce it, and see whether it’s related to words you know. You try to get its meaning, and if you can’t do that on your own, you consult a dictionary or other reference source.

> - The larger your vocabulary is, the faster you can read, because you don’t have to slow down or halt your reading as often to decode words you don’t know.
> 
> - If you want to be a speed reader, you have to develop your vocabulary.

###### Speed reading is comprehending

The purpose of reading is to comprehend — to learn something new, see the world from a different perspective, or maybe just get information to pass an exam or prepare for a business meeting.

> - **Reading speed:** When you don’t read at the right speed, your comprehension is diminished. One of the skills you acquire as a speed reader is knowing when to slow down and when to speed up. The fastest speed readers adjust the speed at which they read, just as the fastest stock car racers slow down when they’re in a crowded field or on a slick patch of roadway.
> 
> - **Breadth of vocabulary:** Having a large vocabulary is a must for speed readers. You can’t get away from it.
> 
> - **Degree of familiarity with the subject matter:** How strong a background you have in the topic you’re reading about determines how well you comprehend what you read.

###### Speed reading is concentrating

Speed reading, however, requires sustained, forceful concentration because when you speed read, you do many things at once. As you see and read the words on the page, you also remain alert to the main ideas that the author wants to present. You have to think along with the author and detect how she presents the material so you can pin down the main ideas. You have to know when to skim, when to read fast, and when to slow down to get the gist of it.

---

## Debunking Speed-Reading Myths

> - **You don't enjoy reading as much when you speed read.** On the contrary! Speed reading is efficient reading
> 
> - **You don't comprehend as well when you speed read.** . Speed reading is the act of reading with higher levels of concentration.
> 
> - **You skip words when you speed read.** Speed reading entails reading words in clumps, or groups. You read more than one word at a time, but no word gets skipped.
> 
> - **You have to run your finger down the page or use a pacer whn you speed read.** Most people have a stereotypical image of a speed reader as a crazed-looking individual dragging her finger or a pacer quickly down the page in the act of reading. However, you don’t need a pacer to speed read.

---

## What You Need to Get Started

If you’re reading a book, magazine, newspaper, or the like, you need a quiet, well-lit place free from noise and other distractions. Make wherever you can concentrate best the place you go when you want to speed read

---

## Proving You Can Read Faster

---

# Chapter 2: It's All about Breaking Bad Reading Habits

## Understanding Vocalization and Its Effects

Reading educators use the term vocalization to describe readers who hear words when they read. Vocalizers are readers who read with their mouths — they say and hear the words as they read.

#### Finding out why vocalizing slows you down

> - **It slows down your reading.** The average person speaks at 150 to 200 words per minute. If you vocalize all words as you read, you can’t read faster than this rate because you have to read the words at the rate you speak them.
> 
> - **It affects comprehension.** If you move your lips or mimic speech when you read, you engage a part of your mind in speech activities when you really ought to devote it to grasping the author’s ideas.
> 
> - **It hinders your ability to comprehend through context clues.** For example, the first two words of this sentence make no sense until you read the complete sentence: “Sénéchal, bailli — the knight aspired to one of these positions in the royal administration.” Readers who vocalize are baffled by the first two words of this sentence and are slow to comprehend them, but fast readers who don’t vocalize can read the entire sentence in one or two glances, and they know immediately that the words sénéchal and bailli refer to administrative positions appointed by the king.
> 
> - **It causes regression.** regression occurs when you’re unsure of what you read and you move your eyes backward over words and sentences you have read already to confirm their meaning. Vocalizing causes regression because your eyes race ahead of your mouth in the act of reading, and your mouth reads one place while your eyes read another. This gap between what the mouth says and what the eyes see creates confusion and causes you to regress.

#### Finding out how (and how much) you vocalize

###### Taking the vocalization test

Read this paragraph to yourself, not aloud. As you read, listen with your ears and also be aware of any movement or feeling in your lips, tongue, vocal cords, larynx (voice box), and throat.

###### Determining what type of reader you are

> - **Motor reader:** These readers tend to move their lips and may even mimic speech with their tongues and vocal cords when reading. Their reading range is very slow (150 to 200 words per minute) because they must read word-by-word at the rate they speak. These readers have poor comprehension due to their slow reading speed.
> 
> - **Auditory reader:** These readers don’t engage their lips, tongue, or vocal cords when they read, but they do silently say and hear the words. They read in the 200 to 400 words-per-minute range. Auditory readers are skillful readers with vocabularies large enough that they can quickly recognize words.
> 
> - **Visual reader:** These readers vocalize minimally or not at all. Visual readers engage their eyes and minds when they read, but not their mouths, throats, or ears. They can read many words at once because they read ideas, not individual words. They read at a rate of 400+ words per minute

---

## Getting Away from Vocalization

#### Reading for meaning rather than sound

Likewise when you read without vocalizing, 

you don’t read word by word: He — was — generous — to — a — fault.
You read thought unit by thought unit: He was generous — to a fault

#### Stopping the vocalization motor

To prevent your lips from moving when you read and disengage your vocal system, try putting your mouth to work at something besides reading.

#### Silencing your inner reading voice

> - **Try to perceive the words rather than see them.** . Imagine that each word is a symbol (not a sound) that conveys a meaning.
> 
> - **Turn off your ears.** Pretend your ears have a volume control and turn it to the mute setting.
> 
> - **Identify the thought units in the sentences, not the words, and read thougts unit by thought unit rather than word by word.** By taking in more words on a line, you force yourself to read more words at a time, and this helps prevent vocalization.
> 
> - **Concentrate harder when you read.**

---

## Preventing Regression When You Read

Reading educators use the term *regression* to describe the act of moving your eyes backward to reread words and sentences you’ve already read. You regress if you lose confidence in understanding what you’ve read and believe you have to go back.

Sometimes regressing is necessary. If you’re reading a dry technical manual or academic paper, you can’t help but regress (or yawn) from time to time. Sometimes regressing is the author’s fault. Reading is a collaboration between the author and reader, but if the author doesn’t live up to his side of the bargain (if he writes badly), you have to regress to material you’ve already read to figure out what the heck is going on.

---

## Chapter 3 Understanding the Mechanics of Speed Reading

#### Understanding Eye Fixations

###### Fixating on Eye Fixations

For your eyes to see anything, they have to be still. You can’t swing your eyes wildly around the room and expect to see anything but a blur. To see words, your eyes must be still, but they must also move left-to-right across the page to take in words in the act of reading.

How can your eyes be still and move at the same time? The answer is **eye fixations**. When you read, your eyes move in fits and starts across the page. They fixate on an individual word or a group of words and then move along to the next word or word group when you have comprehended the first one. In this way, you read across each line of text.

###### Looking at Eye Fixations

Starting about 1910, however, researchers interested in improving students’ reading abilities conducted experiments to see precisely what happens when you read. They discovered eye fixations. They noticed that the eyes do not move at a steady rate across the page but rather by fits and starts. They also discovered that the fewer eye fixations you have when reading, the faster you read.

###### Eye fixations and your vision span

The wider your vision span is, the more words you can process in an eye fixation and the faster you can read. 

> A slow reader with a narrow vision span reads this sentence slowly in six to nine eye fixations, sometimes taking in only a single word per fixation.
> 
> ```
> The rain \ in Spain \ falls \ mainly \ on \ the plain.
> ```
> 
> A fast reader with a wider vision span can read the sentence in two or three eye fixations. This reader has a stronger comprehension because she reads the sentence phrase by phrase.
> 
> ```
> The rain in Spain falls \ mainly on the plain.
> ```

###### Eye fixations and your vocabulary

To see how eye fixations correlate to vocabulary, read these lines carefully and try to understand their meaning:

> Sownynge in moral vertu was his speche, And gladly wolde he lerne, and gladly teche.
> 
> Unless you understand Middle English or you’re familiar with the writings of Geoffrey Chaucer (these lines come from The Canterbury Tales), you had trouble with these lines because few of the words are in your vocabulary. You didn’t recognize the words, so you had to examine them one at a time and probably read the lines in 15 (or more) eye fixations, one for each word.

Notice how much faster you read the translation:

Filled with moral virtue was his speech, And gladly would he learn, and gladly teach.

#### Examining What Comprehension Is

One reason a speed reader comprehends better than a slow reader is the speed reader’s superior ability to absorb the author’s thoughts and ideas in into his or her short-term memory. When you read slowly, you actually confuse your short-term memory, and this confusion impairs your ability to understand what you’re reading.

###### Reading and Your Short-Term Memory

The short-term memory is a part of your brain that initially absorbs information. It can hold no more than five to seven facts or concepts, and only for a short period of time. After that initial short-term storage period, the facts are either crowded out by other facts or assimilated into your long-term memory, where they become a part of your permanent knowledge.

Reading is the act of assimilating information, first into your shortterm memory, and then into your long-term memory.

1. In a single eye fixation, you take in 1 to 14 words.
2. Your eyes move along the sentence to another fixation point. During this fraction of a second, an image of the words you saw flashes to your brain and is stored as a unit of meaning in your short-term memory.
3. Your mind calls for more units of meaning.
4. You take in another 1 to 14 words in an eye fixation.
5. Your eyes again move along the sentence, and an image of the last unit of meaning you took in flashes in your brain. This unit enters your short-term memory beside the unit of meaning that is already there.

###### Assimilating Concepts and Ideas

Cognitive psychologists use the term **chunking** to describe how your brain reorganizes concepts and ideas you’ve absorbed in your short-term memory and applies them to your own experience so you can understand them. Chunking is essentially what happens when you retain what you’ve read.

#### Considering Whether to Use a Pacer

#### Deciding How Much to Bring to Your Reading

> ###### How important is retaining the knowledge I get from this reading?
> 
> If you’re exploring a topic that will advance your career, you need to read with care. For that matter, you may consider underlining words or writing notes in the margin. This type of reading requires your utmost concentration. On the other hand, if you’re reading a menu, you can read entirely at your leisure.
> 
> ###### What do I want to get out of this reading?
> 
> If your reading has an important purpose — if you will be tested on what you read or you need the information for a paper or presentation — you must read with a higher level of concentration. But if you’re reading the sports pages of the newspaper or a detective novel, you can take your sweet time.
> 
> ###### What type of information is being presended?
> 
> Facts and figures require more concentration to absorb. On the other hand, dialogue is easy to read.

---

## Chapter 4 Introducting Speed-Reading Fundamentals

#### Widening Your Vision Span

#### Reading Clump by Clump

##### Reading Vertically as Well as Horizontally

#### Working with Word Groups

###### Grasping word groups as you read

###### Getting the knock for spotting word groups
