# Part 2 Focusing on the Fundamentals

---

## Chapter 5 Establishing Your Reading Rate

#### How the Experts Test Speed-Reading Rates

###### Words per minute(WPM) testing

###### Effective reading rate(ERR) testing

#### Establishing Your Base Reading Rate

#### Seeing Where You Stand as a Speed Reader

> **1 to 200 WPM:** You’re a talker. You read one word at a time at about the same speed as you talk and you may move your lips when you read.
> 
> **200 to 300 WPM:** You’re an average reader, one who probably doesn’t enjoy reading as a hobby. You engage in some vocalization as you read, but you can read several words at once.
> 
> **300 to 700 WPM:** You’re an above average reader who can read groups of words in a single glance, recognizing and reading phrases in sentences quickly.
> 
> **700+ WPM:** You’re a speed reader. You’re adept at reading 10 to 16 words at a glance, both horizontally and vertically on the page.

---

## Chapter 6 Taking in More than One Word at a Time: Reading in Clumps

#### What Is a Clump, Anyway ?

Reading in clumps means to take in more than one word at a time in the course of your reading. A clump is a collection of 4 to 16 next-to-each-other words that you read in a single glance. When you read in clumps, you naturally increase your speed because you can’t slow down to vocalize.

**1. Read the story as a single block of text**

**2. Read the text divided into columns**

**3. Has a line drawn on the page to simulate columns**

#### Comprehending Clump-Reading Mechanics

###### Macular and peripheral vision

Two types of vision:

> **Macular Vision** is your primary focus. When you look directly at something, you see with your macular vision. It comes to you courtesy of the macula (an area of particularly sharp vision) of the retina in your eyes.
> 
> **Peripheral Vision** is what you see less distinctly in the area outside your macular vision. Because receptor cells on the retina of your eye are concentrated at the center and are less concentrated toward the edges, colors and shapes are harder to distinguish in peripheral vision (although you can quickly pick up on motion). But you can see to the left, to the right, above, and below the area bordered by your macular vision.

###### Reading with your peripheral vision too

When you read in clumps, you read words in your peripheral as well as your macular vision. Horizontally, you read words to the left and right of your macular vision; vertically, you read words above and below your macular vision.

Try focusing on the italicized word and taking in the other words with your peripheral vision:

A thing of beauty is a joy forever.

###### Recognizing images as words

Reading words in clumps is possible because when you read most words, you don’t see the letters in the words or the words per se. What you see on the page are images that you recognize from your past reading experience — that is, the words are in your vocabulary.

The only time you actually see a word and examine all its letters is the first few times you encounter it. You have to examine the letters closely and commit the word to memory. After it becomes a part of your vocabulary, you can recognize its image. You can identify and process it quickly as part of a clump in the course of your reading.

#### Making the Shift to Clump Reading

###### Changing your relationship to words on the page

###### Widening your reading vision

###### Reading in context

#### Getting More Practice Reading in Clumps

###### Reading clump phrases

###### Reading sentence clumps

###### Widening your vision: Reading horizontal and vertical clumps

---

## Chapter 7 Getting the Gist from Word Groups

Reading word group by word group rather than word by word increases your reading comprehension. Word groups are critical because the author’s ideas are found in word groups.

#### Going Beyond Clumps to Word Groups

Reading in clumps is the art of taking in 4 to 16 or so words in a single eye fixation — in other words, in a single glance. A word group is a more sophisticated clump. A word group comprises not just 4 to 16 words, but 4 to 16 words that carry meaning.

> **Unbroken paragraph**
> 
> > Our beach house on the Jersey Shore overlooks a boardwalk that extends for a mile to the north and five miles to the south. All year long when the weather is right, walkers and runners and cyclists pass by. The walkers are by far the most numerous.
> 
> **Same paragraph broken into clumps**
> 
> > Our beach house on the
> > Jersey Shore overlooks a
> > boardwalk that extends for a mile
> > to the north and five
> > miles to the south.
> > All year long when the weather is right,
> > walkers and runners and cyclists pass by.
> > The walkers are by far the most numerous.
> 
> **Same paragraph broken into word groups**
> 
> > Our beach house
> > on the Jersey Shore
> > overlooks a boardwalk
> > that extends for a mile to the north
> > and five miles to the south.
> > All year long
> > 
> > when the weather is right,
> > walkers and runners and cyclists pass by.
> > The walkers are by far the most numerous

#### Recognizing Word Groups

###### Getting the idea from idioms

One of the easiest ways to understand word groups is to consider the idiom. An idiom is a figure of speech that you recognize without having to interpret it. *Better safe than sorry*, *take the bull by the horns*, and there’s no place like home are examples of English idioms.

Every idiom is a word group because it’s a single unit of meaning that doesn’t have to appear in context with other words for readers to understand its meaning. All a reader has to do is see the first couple of words of an idiom and the rest of the words usually come tumbling into place. You don’t have to read all the words because you already know them, which means even slow readers can read idioms quickly.

###### Understanding word groups through idioms

###### Picking out prepositional phrases

A prepositional phrase is another type of word group that you can identify and grasp quickly in the course of reading. A prepositional phrase complements another part of a sentence to give it context.

You can spot a prepositional phrase because it almost always begins with one of these words

> about, above, across, after, against, along, among, around, at, before, behind, below, beneath, beside, between, beyond, by, despite, down, during, except, for, from, in, inside, into, near, off, of, on, onto, out, outside, over, past, through, throughout, till, to, toward, under, underneath, until, up, upon, with, within, without

A prepositional phrase provides what, where, when, which one, or how information to the rest of the sentence. Consider the prepositional phrases in these sentences and what they convey:

| Information | Prepositional phrase                       |
| ----------- | ------------------------------------------ |
| What        | The rule from the home office says so.     |
| Where       | We found the key on the table.             |
| When        | After the term ends, they will go fishing. |
| Which one   | She is the smartest of them all.           |
| How         | By working harder, they finished first.    |

To recognize prepositional phrases, remember that a prepositional phrase never appears alone as the subject of a sentence. These phrases aren’t the main topic of a sentence — **they simply complement the important information.**

#### Taking in Larger Word Groups: Reading Phrases

###### Finding other key phrases

In speech and writing, a phrase is a group of words that functions as a single unit in a sentence. For speed-reading purposes, a phrase is a natural word group that provides the context in a sentence. General phrases are a bit harder to recognize than prepositional phrases because you don’t necessarily have words such as at, by, from, on, and toward to clue you in.

> - **Adjectival phrase:** A group of words that begins with an adjective and modifies a noun. Example: The day empty of all hope has arrived.
> 
> - **Adverbial phrase:** A group of words that functions like an adverb to modify the rest of the sentence. Example: I’ll wash the car when I’m good and ready.
> 
> - **Noun phrase:** A group of words that that begins with a noun or pronoun and, taken together, forms the subject or object of a sentence. Example: The day the horses were freed was a happy day.
> 
> - **Verb phrase:** A group of words that begins with a verb and modifies the subject or object of the sentence. Example: The runner crossed the finish line to take first place.

#### Identifying the Most Important Word Groups: Thought Units

#### Reading Word Groups to Increase Comprehension
