# Part 3 Advancing Your Speed-Reading Skills

---

## Chapter 8 Building Your Speed-Reading Momentum

#### Reading Text in Narrow Column Clumps

A word clump consists of words that are next to each other on the page, nothing more and nothing less. In and of itself, a word clump doesn’t have any meaning, unlike word groups and phrases, which do convey meaning.

#### Reading Clump Text in Wider Columns

#### Identifying Word Groups in Continuous Text

#### Reading Word Groups in Continuous Text

---

## Chapter 9 Exercising Your Ability to Read More in Even Less Time

Four unique speed-reading exercises designed to help you hone your speed-reading skills: avoiding vocalizing, expanding your vision span, concentrating harder, and reading aggressively.

#### Introducing Push-Down and Push-Up Exercises

> - **Push-down exercises:** You read the same material multiple times, trying to read the same amount of material in less time each go-around. After each reading, you also answer who, what, where, and when questions, which demonstrate how comprehension, retention, and recall improve at each subsequent reading.
> 
> - **Push-up exercises:** You read the same material multiple times for the same amount of time, trying to read farther and farther in that allotted time each go-around. This exercise demonstrates how the familiarity with text and vocabulary increases reading speed.

#### Getting More from What You Read: Push-Down Exercises

###### Focusing on your silent reading

###### Spreading your vision span even wider

#### Advancing Your Reading Limit: Push-Up Exercises

###### Reading aggresively without regressing

###### Improving your concentration

---

## Chapter 10 Other Reading Strategies to Supplement Your Speed Reading

#### Comparing Other Ways to Collect Info from Text

Skimming, scanning, and prereading, are strategies for supplementing your speed reading. They give you a solid notion of what you’re reading and they help you locate the parts of the text that are worth reading. In the case of `skimming and prereading`, **you familiarize yourself the text**. When you return to the text and speed read it, that familiarity with the text increases your comprehension. `Skimming and prereading` are **a bit like studying a map of an area you want to explore**. You get the lay of the land so you can get more out of your explorations when you undertake them.

###### Skimming for the main ideas

When you skim a page, you take the main ideas from the reading material without reading all the words. You look for and seize upon words that appear to give the main meaning. If you’re a newspaper reader, you already know what skimming is you skim the headlines of the newspaper to decide which articles to read.

###### Scanning for specific words or phrases

Scanning is quickly scouring the text for specific information; unlike skimming, you’re not concerned with the broader meaning of the text. Scanning involves moving your eyes quickly down the page seeking specific words or phrases. It’s the same technique you use when you look up a word in a telephone book or dictionary you already know what you’re looking for, and you concentrate on finding the word that provides the answer to your search.

> Obviously, your reading comprehension drops to just about nothing when you scan. Because you don’t read for the author’s ideas but try to pinpoint only what interests you, you lose the author’s ideas. You don’t comprehend anything except what happens to fall in your area of interest.

###### Prereading to find out what the text is about

When you preread, you direct your attention to telltale parts of a text with the goal of finding out what the text is about, whether it’s worth reading, and what parts to read. You typically use it in combination with another reading method; prereading just acts as the first filter. For example, to preread a company report, you read the headings, subheadings, table titles, and chart titles. Then you either dismiss the whole report because it isn’t worth reading or you read the parts that are of interest to you.

#### Discovering the Art of Skimming

Skimming is taking the most important information from the page without reading all the words. (The term comes from the act of skimming milk, when the dairy farmer skims the cream — the richest material — from the top of the milk before it’s processed.) Strictly speaking, skimming isn’t a reading technique but rather a scavenging technique. You hunt for the choicest information and hope important material doesn’t pass you by.

> ###### You may already be a skimmer
> 
> Even speed readers skim a little bit. They gloss over connecting words and other little words in the course of their reading. In the interest of speed, words such as the, and, for, and with fall under the radar.
> 
> In this paragraph, I’ve removed the connecting and little words, but you can still get the meaning. This paragraph demonstrates what happens when you skim rather than read:
> 
> > Horse ran meadow to woods. We chased but soon lost sight where went. I called several times. Came back, looking tired, the harness still her neck.
> 
> This paragraph reads like an old-fashioned telegram, but you can understand the meaning. In the next paragraph, I restored the connecting and little words. Speed read it and note what happens when you come to a word I previously removed. You may well skip right over it.
> 
> > The horse ran through the meadow and to the woods. We chased after her but soon lost sight of where she went. I called out her name several times. Finally she came loping back, looking a little tired, with the harness still around her neck.

When you speed read, you skim to the extent that you don’t fixate on all the words. In effect, you weed out some words and focus on the remaining ones.

###### Knowing when to skim

But sometimes you can’t find the essential ideas by skimming. If the reading material is especially meaty, you can’t skim. You have to read or speed read the material. In much of your reading, you may even skim part of the article and read other parts. Think of skimming as an extra tool that you can use in addition to speed reading to get your reading done on time.
Often a work’s opening paragraphs and the concluding paragraphs present the author’s main ideas. Opening paragraphs often outline what the author plans to prove, and closing paragraphs explain why the author’s proof is justified. Read these paragraphs closely; don’t skim them.
Bottom line: Use your judgment about when to skim. If you decide to skim, don’t feel like you’re losing something. You occasionally come across valuable material when you skim; when that happens, just stop skimming.

###### Grasping skimming techniques

- **Know what you want**
  
  ask yourself what you want to get from the book or article underneath your nose. Aimlessly skimming with no particular purpose can cause drowsiness, and eventually, sleep.

- **Read vertically as well as horizontally**

- **Think like the author**
  
  You can focus on the original, meaningful material and skip over the material that just supports the author’s argument without advancing it. Detecting the author’s strategies requires you to put yourself in his place. Besides noticing the material on the page, notice how he presents the material. See whether you can recognize how the author places background material, secondary arguments, tangential information, and just plain frippery — anything that isn’t essential to the thrust of his argument — that you can skip.

- **Preread before you start skimming**

- **Try to detect the main idea in the introductory paragraphs**
  
  Sometimes the opening paragraphs, like a table of contents, lay out  the course that the article or chapter takes.

- **Read the first sentence in each paragraph**

- **Don't necessarily read complete sentences**
  
  Read the start of sentences with an eye to whether they will yield useful information, and read them all the way through only if they appear to be useful at first glance.

- **Skip examples and proofs**
  
  Authors often present examples to prove a point, but if you believe the point doesn’t need proving, you can skip the examples.

###### Practicing skimming techniques

#### Scanning for the Information You Need

Think of scanning as a hyperactive form of skimming. You speed through the text in search of information without any regard for the overall gist of the author’s ideas. All you want is information about a specific topic — George Washington, the influenza virus, copper production in 19th-century Peru, the Battle of Hastings, or whatever.

###### Getting the hang of scanning

When you’re scanning, it helps to think in terms of targets. Think of an informational target you want to hit and then try to hit it in the text.

- **Use all your powers of concentrations.**

- **Scan for the two or three search terms that describe the information you want.**

- **Use the Find command to scan a Web page**

- **Look at all italicized words**

- **Don't be shy about using the table of contents and index**

###### Exercising your scanning skills

#### Prereading to get the Lay of the Land

Prereading is a bit like sizing up an item before you buy it. You wouldn’t buy the brand-new car without driving it around the block first, so why should you spend a bunch of time reading a book or article without sizing it up beforehand?

###### Sizing up the reading material

- **Title**

- **Author**

- **Publication date**

- **Headings and subheadings**

- **Graphics, charts, and tables**

- **Paragraph Length**

###### Getting some prereading practice

#### Postreading to Reinforce What You Read

---

## Chapter 11 Taking Advantage of Writing Structure to Read More Quickly

#### Getting to the Main Idea in a Paragraph with Topic Sentences

Going straight to the main idea of each paragraph significantly increases your reading speed. You don’t have to read as much to get a firmer grasp of the author’s fundamental ideas.

The question is: How do you recognize the main idea in a paragraph amid all the details? How do you zoom to what really matters in each paragraph?

###### Understanding topic sentences

The best way to get the main idea in a paragraph is to locate the topic sentence. This sentence describes the subject of the paragraph and its main idea. If you can develop a nose for locating topic sentences, you can get the main idea from paragraphs quickly and thereby improve your reading speed. Typically, the topic sentence comes first in a paragraph, and the remaining sentences elaborate on the topic sentence. But sometimes the topic sentence isn’t the first sentence in the paragraph. Sometimes it’s buried deeper.

###### Locating the topic sentence

- **Read the first sentence carefully**

- **Consider what basic property or characteristic of the paragraph describes.**

- **Think about the paragraph's purpose**

#### Thinking Like the Author

Different authors use different strategies in their work, and if you can identify and detect these strategies, you can find and absorb the author’s ideas more efficiently. A good way to detect the author’s strategy for presenting ideas is to turn quickly through the text, paying special attention to headings.

###### Taking knowledge level into account

- **If the reading material is too complex for your taste, read a little more slowly**

- **If the reading material is simpler than what you need, read quickly and skim where you can.**

###### Paying attention to structure

Essays and articles, like buildings, must have a structure or framework if they’re going to hold up, and you can make your reading more efficient if you pay attention to structure. After you know how a piece is structured, you can focus on the parts that interest you and skim or skip the rest.

- **The basic essay**

- **The new's story**

- **Compare and contrast**

- **Division and subdivision**

- **Cause and effect**

- **Chronological**

#### Looking Out for Signal Words

Signal words tell you where the author is going next, and if you’re alert to these words, you can improve your reading efficiency.

###### Contrast signals

Contrast signals include although, but, conversely, despite, however, instead, in opposition, on the contrary, on the other hand, nevertheless, nonetheless, rather than, still, then again, while.

###### Comparison signals

Comparison signals include and, by comparison, by the same token, correspondingly, equally, in the same way, likewise, similarly.

###### Example signals

Example signals: as an example, for example, for instance.

###### Additional argument signals

cue you when the author is about to give more reasons to support her argument.

These signals include also, and, as well, besides, furthermore, in addition, moreover, what’s more.

###### Causation signals

Tell you that the author is about to describe the result of a previously described activity or phenomenon.

Causation signals include as, because, consequently, given that, for this reason, owing to, seeing that, since, therefore, thus.

###### Conclusion signals

Conclusion signals include accordingly, as a result, consequently, finally, in brief, in conclusion, in short, in sum.

#### Recognizing and Skipping Subordinate Clauses

Subordinate clauses get that name for a reason: They convey information that is secondary to the essential idea or thrust of the sentence. Subordinate clauses are sometimes called dependent clauses because they depend on other parts of the sentence to give them meaning.

In the following example sentence, the subordinate clause tells you how long the country waited, but this information is secondary to the real news — that the king was safe (I put the subordinate clause in italics so that you can find it more easily):

> The entire country, which had been waiting for weeks for news about the king, learned that he was safe in the castle.
