# Part 4 Improving Your Comprehension

---

## Chapter 12 Expanding Your Vocabulary to Become a Better Speed Reader

The larger your vocabulary is, the faster you can read because you don’t stumble as often on words you don’t know or recognize. When you read words that you’re already familiar with, you read beyond the words for their meanings. In the act of reading, you absorb ideas, thoughts, feelings, and descriptions, not individual words. You see the forest, not the trees.

#### Understanding How Your Vocabulary Expands

Unfortunately for schoolchildren the world over, memorizing vocabulary words is one of the least efficient ways to expand your vocabulary. Studies show that you learn new words best when the words have meaning for you or you discover them in context.

###### Discovering vocabulary words by meaning

No matter how arcane or hard to pronounce it is, you can pick up and retain a new word if it has meaning for you. Or consider what happens when you become ill. Because your health is at stake, you soon become intimately acquainted with hard-to-understand words from the medical profession that previously meant nothing to you.

###### Discovering vocabulary words by context

You can also acquire new vocabulary words by context in the course of you reading. Whether you know it or not, you have a built-in aptitude for learning words by context. You don’t have to consult a dictionary in your reading when you want to understand a new word.

When you come across a word you don’t know, study it for a minute. See whether any part of it looks familiar. Perhaps you recognize a prefix, root, or suffix in the word that gives you a clue to its meaning (later in this chapter, “Looking at Prefixes, Roots, and Suffixes” explains what those elements are). Perhaps the sentence and paragraph where the word is found tell you what the word means.

> The main point to remember about enlarging your vocabulary while you read is to not gloss over words you don’t know. Pause in your reading and give them a moment’s thought. You can’t learn new words if you don’t take the time to decode and absorb them.

#### Looking at Prefixes, Roots, and Suffixes

One way to get a head start on expanding your vocabulary is to be able to recognize and interpret prefixes, roots, and suffixes in words. Many English words are constructed from the same prefixes, roots, and suffixes. Master these affixes (as linguists call them) and you can interpret many words you don’t understand without having to resort to a dictionary. example: neologism.

> - **Neo:** This prefix means “new”; you can also find it in the words Neolithic and neophyte.
> 
> - **log:** This root means “word”; it also appears in the words dialogue, epilogue, and monologue.
> 
> - **ism:** This suffix indicates a condition or manner. It also shows up in the words baptism and criticism

###### Peeking at prefixes

A prefix appears at the beginning of a word to give the word a new inflection or meaning.

###### Getting to the root of roots

These roots originate in Latin and ancient Greek. The table lists the meaning of each root and example words that show how the root plays out in different words.

###### Searching out suffixes

A suffix appears at the end of a word and gives the word a different inflection or meaning.

---

## Chapter 13 Applying Speed Reading to Various Reading Tasks

#### Speed Reading the Newspaper

On the front page, the article that the editors deem most important occupies the upperright columns; the second most important article appears in the upper-left columns. Some articles have subheadings that spell out what information is available. In news articles, facts are presented in descending order of importance so that you can get the gist of a story by reading the first one or two paragraphs and then keep reading if you decide you want to know more. You have to slow down from time to time, depending on the type of article you’re reading:

> - **Fact reporting:** You can read articles that report bare facts — like the kind that are found on the first page — quickly. These articles explain the how, where, who, when, and why. You can speed read this information.
> 
> - **Explanation:** You can read articles that report bare facts — like the kind that are found on the first page — quickly. These articles explain the how, where, who, when, and why. You can speed read this information.
> 
> - **Opinion:** Read opinion pieces like the kind found on the op-ed page slowly. These articles aren’t structured like the other articles in the newspaper. In an opinion piece, the author constructs an argument, and you have to mind how the argument unfolds to see whether you agree with it. Because opinion pieces are subjective, you have to read them skeptically (and perhaps seek out opposing views as well). This practice requires more reading time.

#### Managing Online Articles

#### Handling E-mail Correspondence

#### Prereading Nonfiction Books

- **Table of Contents:** Glance at the chapter titles and headings to find out what’s in the book. You can also tell a lot about an author’s ability to organize ideas and present arguments from the table of contents. If the topics in the table of contents are presented in a logical manner, if each topic leads succinctly into the next, you’re holding a well-organized book in your hands.

- **Index:** Scour the index for information about the topic you’re interested in. If the information you need isn’t in the index, the book probably isn’t worth reading.

- **Preface:** You can usually find a good description of the book’s purpose in the preface, as well as information about the author’s background and credentials.

- **Introductions:** A good introduction explains what is covered in the book. Plus, you can get a feel for the author’s writing and determine whether the book will be easy to read or a slog.

- **Chapter summaries:** A good introduction explains what is covered in the book. Plus, you can get a feel for the author’s writing and determine whether the book will be easy to read or a slog.

#### Tackling Textbooks

- **Read the glossary first(if your textbook has one).** Taking the time to acquire words you don’t know from the glossary is worthwhile because it enables you to read the textbook that much more quickly when the time comes to start reading.

- **Scour the pages for graphs, charts, and tables.** Especially in science textbooks, graphs, charts, and tables sometimes tell half the story. Acquainting yourself with these items is an excellent way to get a feel for the information that the textbook has to offer.

- **Find out what your teacher or professor wants you to learn from the textbook and seek out that info.** No sense in slaving over text you’re not accountable for. Plus, you probably paid a small fortune for that textbook; your teacher or professor owes you an explanation about what to read in it.

- **Develop an underlining or note-taking scheme and mark the textbook as you read.** My favorite note-taking technique is to draw a dot next to passages in the book that I think are important or worth reviewing. Later, I can quickly scan for these important passages.

- **Improve retention by reviewing and quizzing yourself** When you finish reading a chapter or selection, pause a moment and summarize to yourself what you just read. Make up half a dozen questions about the material and then answer them. This technique helps you retain what you read.

#### Speed Reading Standardized Tests

#### Reading for Pleasure

In all the talk of reading efficiency and reading speed, you can easily forget that reading is one of life’s greatest pleasures. And because it’s so pleasurable, savor the reading experience when you feel the urge. Slow down and enjoy the novels, biographies, math treatises, history books, or whatever type of books you love most.

# 
